Only your best friend would show you

In the dating scene kids these say its the jundle the wild wild west, beucase of the ease of access to technology dating apps, the most people there have ever been on the planet, the tick tok diet, most people have options and eeks its hard to find something real and something representative of old fashioned love. Betty met Ron, and on the first date ron brough flowers to the date opened the door for her, he was just the perfect genelte man, the fact he was good looking was just a bonus, she though to herself, he is perfect in everyway and I am truly happy. the sad reality of it though was Ron was promiscuous he was minpulative and a liar, he was dating multiple women, and his firend knew and laughed with him, they were impressed by his manipulative powers,  some people at their university also knew of what Ron does when he goes on a night out, ron, if he was alone, he would be taking several different women and just enjoying life according him. meanwhile lying to Better about his whearebaout and what he was doing, she was just one many for him and he was one in a million for her. The bystandard who knew saw it as none of their business, they knew he was with better they knew betty though they were a perfect couple but for them it was just gossip news, and osmehting to talk about, they related and some might have felt sorry for her, but it wasn't reality affecting their life and none of their business. infact some might have been afraid to get on Rons bad side and even though they wanted to they chose not to say antyhign out of lyalty or fear or just out right indifference. 

Up till Cassy, Bettys best friend found, she was furous when she hear dthe news, and having seen it her self, he knew she had to tell, betty, she confronted the friend who told her but did nothing about it, why didn't hyou do anything, and they said well we tried, but u know how she is, she thinks we overexaggerating and she thinks we are jaloous so we just leave her to it she will reap the consequences her self. But cassey went striht to better and confront her with the facts, and to her amazement, they were right she dismissed it and says it cant be true, you must be mistaken. 

now at this point vassey is also at a cross road, leave her friend alone, or go further to demonstate the evidence, she know it will her better to know the truth and to some extend she might be (betty) in denial and want to live in her made up world, but cassey know it will hurt even more to find out the truth and not think her friends had her back, that it would be better now rather than later, after BEtty is making a huge mistaking contemplating telling all her family introducing him and considereing marriage, spending money buying him gifts cancelling shifts, considering moving cities to be with him, all these things come at a cost and casey like and loves her fiend too much. Casey consideres that in the end when betty found she will probably hate her a little, but she decides it worth the risk, and she belive her friend will one day forgive her and come to relaise that she was only looking out for her. she proceeds to demonstrate the evidence of Rons lifestyle, Cassey join a dating up and begin speaking with Ron, takes screen shots, records voice notes, and then goes to Betty and says I have evidence if you want to see I have been undercover beucase I wanted you to the reality - all his claims are flase, infact I can call him right now to show you that he isn't where you tink he is, and you can hear me speak ith on the phone - BEtty sees the evidence and she is shattered. She initially blames cassey for seducing Ron, casts her out, but after time she is forced to confront the truth and apologise to casey.

Some truth are hard to tell and hard to demonstrate but only a true friend can go the extra mile to do this for you, set up to gether the evidence, refuse to light in tha background with the rest of them, the rest used her to their own entertainment expense. when people have to pay a price to tell you the truth it can cost. But only your best friend would show you. 

ANother story, Marco is the toughest kid on the block every is afaid of him, he always does good on his promises, his bigger thatn the other kids, Pedro and Juan, start hanging out marcos, crew, they like the popularyt they gain, they are not bad kids at all, but they too are taking out some bully insurance, since they wont be targets if they hand our with marco, they also like being popular and being invited to cool parties. but Marco, is really bad kid, and at one party, he decides to take pedros phone and steal it, now this is actually his mom phone he was just showing off at the party that he has a new phone, its worth a lot of money. all the kids see marco do it, and say nothing including pedro, they know the consequences of double crossing marco, no one says a thing, they even help him look for his phone, pedro is distraught, even kids sympathetic to pedor who really liked remain silent, its too risky and too much trouble, but Jjuan finally decides to take the consequences on himself, he tell Pedro the trught, and confront marco, ofcourse Marco makes good on his promise to always get revenge and trhow them both out, battered and balck eyed Pedro asks, why did you do that man, you didn't have to get outsted, you could have told me inprivate and I would much rather face my mome than get jumped by marcos boys, and Juan blacked eyed and bettered looks to PEdro and says only beucase youre my friend. 

Only your best friend will show you the truth even if it comes at incredible cost to themselves. 

In our relationship we are heading toward a cliff we cannot see, we blinded by sin, and ultimately it will lead to demise, we cant even hear the warning. God has warned us that we will die, in the garden, the consequences of disboeduence and beinst cast aside is permnanet distruction, yet, satan has denied that, after all he hasn't died the death that he warned about, this death is not death of old age or death by tragic accident or disease, although these deaths are also serious, they are not final. THe bible says she is sleeping and Lazarus is sleeping, we are told we one day will wake up from this. there is coming a final death, of total separation from God, this one is final, this death we warns is far worse, completely abandoned by God we reap the consequences of choices. BEucase what else can love do but let us go in the end when we reject his love. But God knows that his warning has been called into question, thus he has demonstrated he has suffered to show us, beucase only your best would show you what he decided to show using himself as an example, he dies on the cross, completely forsaken by God, god gave him up on the cross. the main facts of this is the most excruciating part in the separation, and God role in this process is one of letting Go finally not one of punitive punishment, and it was aweful. the main tenants of the process are demonstrated though him, because only your best friend would show - he did this so we might grow in trust - Paul says in romans he showed publically denied to be taken advtange of by faith, beucase in his devine forbearance he had apparently overlooked mans former sins, indeed he suspended and preserved the full consequences form Eden. Jesus will forever maintain his human nature, he will forever one with us, from devine, he is flesh with us, shares a naturewith us, that is permenet, but he also couldn demonstrate dying for eternity what does that even look like how do u even do that, the point was does sin and separation lead to death, yes, what is gods role? the only loving thing one can do when rejected, he lets god, what will the experience be like. HAd God not intervened immediately to veil his glory which is decribed like a fire, adman and even would have been consumed, this glory described as fire that doesn't burn bushes, a strnage fire, indeeed, its not physically in the sense harmful, but for those who live in guitl and sin, it exposes and rbing them to light, in God they cannot hide behind lies, they beg the sotnes to fall on them, paul given an alanogy to this, if your enemy does bad to you and you do good to them it become like burning coals on their head, this analogy, slefishnes confronted by love and truth confronted by lies, this is the incompability they speak of, its not imposed, its natural consequcnes, we want to avoid people we have worng when guilty ebucase guilt is not pleasant, Judas knew he had done worng na dcouldnt stand being in jesus presen, jesus wasn't imposing anything on judas, he was mere driven by his own conscious an dhe took his own life. wether they kill themselves, die of a broken heart like jesus, or are consumed by their own guilt, or even kill each other in rage and evil - we know one thing, God involvement in it, we know that the end result of sin is incompatibility with life, life is designed to thrive an operate in the ideal conditional of mutual love and trust. This is key in the cross.

and ultimately he showed us beucase he is our best friend and only your best friend would show hyou 