Chapter Sixteen
God’s Last Pleading with His Children
The last of the sixty-six books of the Bible, the book of Revelation,
describes the war that began up in heaven, triggered by distrust regarding God’s character and government (Revelation 12:4, 7–10). A lack of
trust led one-third of the brilliant and intelligent angels to rebel against
God. That war is further described (Revelation 14:6–12) as culminating
in three final messages of warning and invitation, all sent from a heavenly
Father who wants none of His children to be lost. So the same Bible
book that describes the beginning of the war also speaks of its end.
The final resolution of this conflict of distrust includes the second
coming of Christ and the restoration of this damaged planet to its original beauty and peace. But Revelation also tells us that some great and
terrible events stand between us and that full restoration. We can trust
the God we worship and admire not to leave His children unenlightened and unwarned. So He gave us a picture of three angels, bringing
three messages from heaven. Each of these angels proclaims a special
message of warning and invitation. I share the whole passage here:
Then I saw another angel flying in midair, and he had the eternal
gospel to proclaim to those who live on the earth— to every nation,
tribe, language and people. He said in a loud voice, “Fear God and
give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come. Worship
him who made the heavens, the earth, the sea and the springs of
water.”
A second angel followed and said, “Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the
Great, which made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her
adulteries.”
A third angel followed them and said in a loud voice: “If anyone
worships the beast and his image and receives his mark on the forehead or on the hand, he, too, will drink of the wine of God’s fury,
which has been poured full strength into the cup of his wrath. He will
be tormented with burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels
and of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment rises for ever and
ever. There is no rest day or night for those who worship the beast and
his image, or for anyone who receives the mark of his name.” This calls
for patient endurance on the part of the saints who obey God’s com-
mandments and remain faithful to Jesus. Revelation 14:6–12, NIV.
The Three Angels’ Messages
As you look over those three messages, there are many terms that
call for explanation. But they are all discussed elsewhere in the Bible.
That is why we really need all previous sixty-five books to understand
the sixty-sixth. You may recall our discussion of one of these terms in
Chapter Nine, “There Is No Need to Be Afraid of God,” the word
“fear” (Greek: phobêthête), as in “fear God” (Revelation 14:7). In contexts
like this, the word does not mean terror. It means reverence. Since this
angel brings good news (Revelation 14:6), he must not mean that we
should be terrified of God. A number of versions have ventured to clarify this, for example: “Honor God” (Revelation 14:7, GNT), and
“Revere God” (Berkeley). Words like that can also express the meaning of
“fear.”
Still, there is much fearsome wording in these three angels’ messages. If this is God’s last pleading with His children, would it not have
been better to have just the first angel’s message, and then the last sentence of number three? If God is pleading with us to trust Him,
wouldn’t that have been better? The message could then say, “Honor
God, and give Him glory, because the hour of His judgment has come.
Worship Him who made the heavens, the earth, the seas, and the springs
of water” (Revelation 14:7). And then go straight to, “This calls for
patient endurance on the part of the saints who obey God’s commandments and remain faithful to Jesus” (Revelation 14:12). Why do we need
all that fearsome wording in between? Wouldn’t the shorter version have
seemed more like pleading?
In answering these questions, it is important to note what has gone
before, particularly Revelation 12, 13, and then 14. Chapter 12 describes
the war between Christ and Satan, and all the efforts of Satan to deceive
both angels and men. Then Chapter 13 describes Satan’s final effort to
deceive, which is the subject of the next chapter in this book, “Satan’s
Final Effort to Deceive.” In his final effort, Satan is primarily seeking to
deceive the people living on this planet. Revelation 13 describes his
almost complete success. The whole world worships him, except for a
certain few. The chapter even describes the powers and the organizations that Satan works through in order to accomplish his deceptive purposes. They are represented by biblical symbols drawn from the other
sixty-five books of the Bible. More than that, near the end of Revelation
13, his loyal followers are pictured as bearing a mark of their preference
for and trust in Satan’s end-time emissary — that mark is notoriously
known as the “mark of the beast” (Revelation 13:16–17).
Then comes Revelation 14, God’s last pleading with His children,
the three final messages of warning and invitation that are the subject of
this chapter. Knowing the whole history of earth, one is not so surprised
at the fearsome words of warning in the second and third angel’s messages (Revelation 14:8–11). But we should always read these in light of
the first angel, who comes with good news, the everlasting gospel
(Revelation 14:6). That’s what the word gospel means; good news. The
first angel doesn’t come with new information. He brings the everlasting
good news. This good news has always been the truth. It will always
remain the truth. It will always remain the basis of our faith and trust
and freedom for eternity.
The Eternal Good News
What is this eternal gospel, this eternal good news? Surely, no one
was more confident that he knew the content of the gospel than the
apostle Paul. On one occasion, when his version of the good news was
being seriously challenged by some of his own colleagues, Paul made this
extraordinary claim:
If anyone, if we ourselves or an angel from heaven, should preach
a gospel at variance with the gospel we preached to you, he shall be
held outcast. I now repeat what I have said before; if anyone preaches
a gospel at variance with the gospel which you received, let him be outcast! Galatians 1:8–9, NEB.
Now if the apostle’s language should seem too strong, this rendering in the New English Bible is the mildest I could find. Gentle J. B.
Phillips translates, “May he be a damned soul!” The Greek is anathema
esto. May he be “anathema.” The Good News Bible, produced by the
American Bible Society, translates, “May he be condemned to hell!” The
Living Bible states, “Let God’s curse fall upon him!” The King James
Version translates, “Let him be accursed!” When do we say that about
our fellow human beings? The New International Version translates,
“May he be eternally condemned!” To say the least, Paul was profoundly
convinced of the rightness of his version of the good news and the dire
consequences of turning to another gospel. You recall how Romans 1
describes the dire consequences of turning away from the truth (1:20–32).
Paul was stunned to observe the willingness of so many early
Christians, who had recently been set free from the meaningless requirements of false religion, to go back once again to the fear and the bondage
of their former ignorance and misinformation about God:
I am astonished to find you turning so quickly away . . . and following a different gospel. Not that it is in fact another gospel; only
there are persons who unsettle your minds by trying to distort the
gospel [emphasis supplied] of Christ. Galatians 1:6–7, NEB.
He goes on to ask how they could possibly be so foolish, comparing the
good news they had received with what they had given up. Look at
Galatians 3: “You foolish Galatians! Who put a spell on you? Before your
very eyes, you had a clear description of the death of Jesus Christ on the
cross!” [emphasis supplied], Galatians 3:1, NEB. He continues reasoning
with them in Galatians 4:8–9, GNT: “In the past you did not know God,
and so you were slaves of beings who are not gods. But now that you
know God . . .[emphasis supplied], how is it that you want to turn back .
. . ?” Notice how the same turning point for the Galatians is related to the
knowledge of God (Galatians 4:9), to the good news (Galatians 1:6–7), and
to the cross (Galatians 3:1). All three of these texts address the same subject. The good news of the cross is the truth about God.
Paul is sympathetic with the Galatians, in spite of his strong words.
After all, what could be expected of new converts when some of the
leading Christians in Jerusalem were themselves contradicting and compromising the gospel of Christ (as described in Acts 21:15–28)? Even
Peter, after his broadening experience with Cornelius, reverted to some
of the narrow views that he used to hold. According to Galatians 2:11–
14, Paul was moved to correct Peter to his face and in public. How could
Paul feel right about doing that? In 1 Corinthians 13 he wrote that love
is never rude. Love never insists on having its own way. This is also the
Paul who wrote Romans 14. He was so respectful of other people’s freedom that, when there was disagreement over this or that religious matter, he would say, “Let everyone be fully convinced in his own mind,”
and, “Who are you to criticize one another?” Romans 14:5, 10.
But when people suppressed or perverted the good news about
God, gentle Paul spoke out with almost frightening conviction and
power. He even went so far as to suggest that these legalistic agitators
were confusing the new saints about the good news of truth and freedom. They were upsetting the new converts by urging them to re-adopt
the rite of circumcision and other legalistic details. He said, “I wish they
would go the whole way and make eunuchs of themselves” (Galatians
5:12). You know that Paul must have been deeply moved to say that
about those legalistic agitators.
The Good News and the Character of God
How could Paul be so sure about this good news, when it has been
opposed or misunderstood by so many through the centuries? What perversion was so serious that Paul could speak as strongly as he did to the
Galatian believers? Through the years, I’ve asked many Christians what
they consider to be the essence of the good news. The responses have
included things like the atonement, the Second Coming, and eternal life;
almost every aspect of the Christian faith. But if God is the way His enemies have made Him out to be, eternal life would not be good news,
would it? Whether any doctrine, even the Second Coming, is good news
depends on the kind of person we believe God to be.
I think, therefore, that the most fitting and truest answer to that
question is one that a good friend gave me years ago: “The good news is
that God is not the kind of person Satan has made Him out to be.”
Coming back to an earlier text, Paul related the good news to the issues
in the Great Controversy when he suggested that if even an angel from
heaven should come with a different version of the good news, we
should not believe him. Instead, let him be outcast or accursed (based on
Galatians 1:8–9).
It seems, at first, incredibly dogmatic, almost arrogant, for Paul to
speak like that. What if your pastor, at the end of the sermon this weekend, should say, “If anyone of you in the audience should disagree with
my sermon, let him be condemned to hell!” Would we think that perhaps the pastor was in need of a vacation? What do we make of Paul
talking like this? Let’s not forget that it was an angel from heaven who
began the circulation of misinformation about God. And that same angel
from heaven masquerades as an angel of light in order to deceive you
and me and turn us against our God (2 Corinthians 11:14–15).
• • • • •
By the life that He lived and the unique and awful way
He died, Jesus demonstrated God’s righteousness,
answered all the questions, and met any accusations leveled against God.
• • • • •
Throughout this book we have spoken about Satan’s charges; that
God is arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. He even
charges that God has lied to us when He says that sin results in death
(Genesis 2:17). He says that God is selfish, not worthy of our love and
trust, and not respectful of our freedom. At some length we have considered the way God replies; not in claims, but in demonstration. Remember
how humbly God took His case into court, the court being the family of
the universe? The good news is that God has won His case. The whole
universe now agrees that Satan has lied about our God. “It is finished,”
Jesus said ( John 19:30).
By the life that He lived and the unique and awful way He died,
Jesus demonstrated God’s righteousness, answered all the questions, and
met any accusations leveled against God. Paul said he was proud to be a
bearer of this good news. He also links the good news with the cross in
1 Corinthians:
Christ did not send me to baptize. He sent me to tell the Good
News. . . . For the message about Christ’s death on the cross is
nonsense [emphasis supplied] to those who are being lost; but for us
who are being saved it is God’s power. 1 Corinthians 1:17–18, GNT.
Note how he combines the good news with Christ’s death, and also
God’s power to save. He uses similar language in Romans 1: “For I am
not ashamed of the gospel [the good news]: it is the power of God for salvation. . . . For in it the righteousness of God is revealed. . . .” Romans
1:16–17, RSV. The good news, power, God’s righteousness, and the
cross are all tied together. And there’s nothing new about this. This was
the everlasting good news in Old Testament times as well:
Let him who boasts boast about this: that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercises kindness, justice and
righteousness on earth, for in these I delight, declares the Lord.
Jeremiah 9:24, NIV.
Let’s combine them all together now. The good news is about God.
It’s about His righteousness. It cost the death of Christ to prove it. This
good news about God’s righteousness has great power to move people,
if they’re willing to listen. It has great power to win them back to repentance and faith. It has great power because it is the truth. It has great
power because it is such good news.
What God Is Really Like
We have earlier discussed the meaning of Romans 3:25–26 at some
length. Forgive me for putting in my own translation. I just can’t find
one that does it right, in my opinion:
For God showed Him publicly dying as a means of reconciliation
[at-one-ment]. This was to demonstrate God’s own righteousness. . .
to show that He Himself is righteous and not as His enemies have
made Him out to be. And because He is righteous and trustworthy,
He sets right everyone who trusts in Jesus (Maxwell).
Paul confessed with shame that formerly he had misrepresented
God. He had believed Satan’s lies to the extent that he used force, even
stoning, to compel people to obey (based in part on 1 Timothy 1:12–16).
But after Paul accepted the good news, he devoted the rest of his life to
telling the truth. Who has written more eloquently about freedom,
about love, and about trust than Paul? Who else has so clearly assured
us that all God asks of us is trust (Romans 1:16–17), that we are not
under law, but under grace (Romans 6:14–15), and that there is no need
to be afraid of God (Romans 8:15)? Paul had learned the truth about God
that sets His children free.
• • • • •
The good news about God’s righteousness has great power
to move people, if they’re willing to listen.
• • • • •
You may remember Jesus’ words: “You will know the truth and the
truth will set you free.” John 8:32, Williams. For Jesus, in John, “the
truth” is always the truth about His Father ( John 1:17–18; 14:9). You
see, if God were the kind of person Satan has made Him out to be, there
would be no freedom. There would only be the bondage of fear (Romans
8:15). But Paul had learned the truth, and now he took it everywhere he
could. He took it to the Galatians. And when he brought them the
truth, he also brought them freedom. They loved it at first. Then they
turned away from it. He urged them: “This is the freedom with which
Christ has made us free. So keep on standing in it, and stop letting your
necks be fastened in the yoke of slavery again.” Galatians 5:1, Williams.
There was a time in Paul’s life when he himself was satisfied with
the obedience that resulted from law and from fear. He thought it was
the right thing to do, what the sovereign God preferred. But once Paul
discovered the good news, the truth, he realized that God does not want
the obedience that springs from law and from fear. He wants the obedience of faith; the obedience that comes from free people who agree with
God that this is the right thing to do. They agree so fully, they don’t
even need to be told to do so. They do what is right because they agree
that it is right.
Notice Paul’s understanding of his commission in Romans 1. He
begins the book by saying, “I have been called to make known God’s
good news about Him and about His Son” (based on Romans 1:1). Then
he goes on with these words: “Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom I
have received grace and a commission for His Name’s sake to win men to
the obedience that springs from faith. . . .” Romans 1:4–5, Weymouth. Not
the obedience that springs from law, but the obedience that springs from
faith. What produces this obedience that springs from faith? Isn’t it the
good news about our God, the kind of person He is, that leads us to a
willingness to listen (the definition of obedience) ? Isn’t it how highly He
values our freedom, and how infinitely worthy He is of our love and
trust, that leads us to loyalty? “Here are they who keep God’s commandments and maintain their loyalty to Him and to His Son” (based on
Revelation 14:12).
The Climax of the Eternal Good News
So the first angel comes with the everlasting gospel, the everlasting
good news. What is it? Each of us should study and think this through
for ourselves. The following is a summary of my understanding of the
good news:
God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out
to be — arbitrary, unforgiving, and severe. Jesus said, “If you have
seen Me, you have seen the Father.” God is just as loving and trustworthy as His Son, just as willing to forgive and heal. Though infinite in majesty and power, our Creator is an equally gracious Person
who values nothing higher than the freedom, the dignity, and the
individuality of His intelligent creatures — that their love, their
faith, their willingness to listen and obey may be freely given. He
even prefers to regard us not as servants but as friends.
This is the truth revealed through all the books of Scripture.
This is the everlasting Good News that wins the trust and admiration of God’s loyal children throughout the universe.
• • • • •
You can be adamant, immovable, and dogmatic about
freedom, because you will never hurt anybody with that
view.
• • • • •
It seems to me that’s the only “truth” it is safe to be dogmatic
about. Here we can be like Paul and say, “Even if an angel came with a
different picture of God, it is wrong, and I will not believe it.” To me,
this is not a negotiable position. You can be adamant, immovable, and
dogmatic about freedom, because you will never hurt anybody with that
view. You are immovably committed to freedom, and to the picture of
God as valuing nothing higher than the freedom of His children. To me,
that is the essence of the message of the first angel (Revelation 14:6–7).
With that in mind, the second angel comes and simply says, “The opposition has collapsed in corruption and defeat” (Revelation 14:8). Then the
third angel warns of the inevitable consequences of preferring Satan’s
lies to this magnificent truth (Revelation 14:9–11).
Now it’s true that the third angel’s message has the most fearsome
wording in the whole Bible. I’m sure the Devil would have us misunderstand these words as the words of an angry God. But all the previous
books of Scripture have prepared us to understand the terrible consequences of sin. Through the words of Scripture, we watched Jesus die.
We know that God would do anything to spare His children the same
fate. Story after story in Scripture prepares us to see our heavenly Father
as the One who would much prefer to speak gently to us of the truth.
When we know Him in this way, we can trust Him when He raises
His voice one last time in these messages of warning and invitation. The
God we worship would never allow us to pass through these closing
events unenlightened and unwarned. Behind the fearsome warning of
the third angel’s message there stands the God of Hosea 11:8 crying:
“How can I give you up? Why will you die? How can I let you go?” The
same person who wrote the awesome words of the third angel also wrote
1 John 4: “God is love. . . . There is no fear in love.” 1 John 4:16, 18,
Williams. The apostle John was the beloved disciple who knew all about
love, the one who told us there is no need to be afraid. He is also the one
who wrote the fearsome words of the third angel’s message. God could
reveal this to him because he understood the larger picture of what God
is like.
As loyal members of God’s family, we have the privilege of participating in the final proclamation: “This Good News about the Kingdom
will be preached through all the world . . . and then the end will come.”
Matthew 24:14, GNT. The good news about the Kingdom is about the
way the King runs His Kingdom. Could you conceive of any higher
honor or privilege than to join with the loyal angels in making this good
news, this everlasting truth about our God, known to all the world?
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: I was thinking about the title of this chapter,
“God’s Last Pleading with His Children.” Then I looked at those messages in Revelation 14, particularly the second and the third, and wondered if a more appropriate title might have been, “God’s Last
Threatening.” Isn’t that what’s happening here?
Graham Maxwell: Well, it certainly is a warning. The language is
so serious. If we were more willing to listen, God wouldn’t have to talk
like this. We looked earlier at the words of Hosea, “Come home, come
home” (Hosea 14:1–9), but humanity, both then and now, is not listening. This is the same God who sent she bears (2 Kings 2:24), and thundered on Sinai (Exodus 19:16–19; 20:18), because He doesn’t want to lose
His children. In Chapter Nine I tell the story of a father on a mountain
trail thundering at his son to keep him from falling off a precipice. People
nearby might misunderstand what the father is doing until they see the
whole situation. They might end up apologizing for misunderstanding
the father’s action. Similarly, I think we owe God an apology for misunderstanding the times He’s raised His voice.
Lou: So what you’re really saying is that the tone of God’s voice is
not angry as He says these things. It’s the serious consequences that call
forth such serious warnings.
Graham: He certainly wishes to spare us these consequences. It’s
somewhat like the tobacco problem. People often don’t believe there is
danger in smoking, so the government requires serious notices on each
pack of cigarettes. They’re trying to find as many ways to warn people
as possible.
Lou: You gave a good deal of emphasis in this chapter on the gospel
as “good news.” Still, it’s hard to see how the second and third angel’s
messages (Revelation 14:8–11) are really good news.
Graham: Well, there is also sadness in the good news. Victory in
the Great Controversy will bring great joy on the one hand, but God is
also going to lose vast numbers of His children forever. When the End
comes, I see Him crying and smiling at the same time. “We’ve won, but
look how many we have lost.” I just wouldn’t want people to think that
the second angel is announcing good news because the other side has
taken a beating, and the third angel is good news because the people who
hurt me are going to be burned. I hope no one thinks it is good news in
that way. But there is another way in which it’s good news. In the third
angel’s message God is not torturing His children to death. If the death
of Christ tells us how the wicked will die, God did not torture His Son
to death. He sadly gave Him up, as He will give up the wicked in the
end. That is also important good news. But you are right; it’s not totally
good news. It’s also very sad.
Lou: But if the gospel includes all three of these messages, as I think
you are saying, shouldn’t we say a great deal more about the destruction
of the wicked when we preach the gospel?
Graham: Yes, if we say we are preaching the three angels’ messages
(Revelation 14:6–12), then we’ve got to preach number three
(Revelation 14:9–11), which is about destruction. But if the cross demonstrates how the sinner dies, how can you preach the cross without
preaching the destruction of the wicked? Or to put it another way, to
preach the third angel’s message is to explain why Jesus died and how
He died. So the third angel’s message is the message of the cross. That’s
why we even speak of the third angel’s message as being righteousness
by faith. It’s only if we preach it correctly, only if the third angel’s message raises serious enough questions about the death of the wicked, that
we can go to the cross to find out by observation just how Jesus died.
The cross is amazing good news, because it says there is no need to be
afraid of God. He did not torture His Son on the cross and He will not
torture the wicked at the End.
Lou: Graham, you and I know that the Seventh-day Adventist
denomination is strongly connected with this third angel’s message.
How was it that our church came to identify with the third angel’s message?
Graham: It’s actually something of a historical accident. The
Adventist pioneers saw the three angels happening in a historical order.
The first angel’s message was given, and then the second, and then the
third. We do feel that we’re the people with the final message, which
includes number three. But the Adventist pioneers always referred to
“the three angels’ messages.” They realized it’s a barren message to
preach number three alone. We should always preach all three.
Lou: Would you go so far as to say that there’s something especially
unique about this third angel’s message? Is it appropriate to identify
myself as a Christian who believes in the third angel’s message?
Graham: Well, if one took the third angel’s message just the way it
reads without understanding what the rest of the Bible has said about it,
then a Seventh-day Adventist is a Christian who believes in eternal torment.
Lou: Uh, oh! That’s not what I had in mind!
Graham: I’m sure it wasn’t, but by calling people’s attention to
the meaning of the cross in the larger setting of the Great Controversy,
we can offer a truly biblical explanation of the third angel. At first
glance, the third angel’s message is fearsome. But to explain it in the
light of how and why Jesus died is to bring very heartening news to
people. The message is serious, yes, but it is no reason to be afraid of
God.
Lou: So the Seventh-day Adventist Church has chosen to strongly
identify itself with all of the three angels’ messages. Revelation 14:6–12.
How did that choice come about? Do you think it was a good one?
Graham: I think it was a very good choice, because the position
that these three messages have in the Bible suggests they are the final
messages of invitation and warning. They also provide us with a wonderful opportunity to summarize all the rest of Scripture. If you read these
three messages apart from the rest of the Bible, they’re fearsome. But if
you read them in the light of all sixty-six Bible books, it is an opportunity
to demonstrate our conviction that the whole Bible is the word of God.
The Bible should be read as a whole, and these three messages must be
understood in the light of all that’s gone before.
Lou: But that raises another question. Why not just take the third
angel’s message (Revelation 14:9–11) as it reads? Why not read it and just
believe it the way it reads, that people are going to be burned forever,
that the smoke of their burning goes up forever and ever? Revelation
14:11.
Graham: Well, if you were reading the whole Bible you would just
have read in Jude that Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed with eternal fire (Jude 1:7), but that fire went out a long time ago. So the book of
Jude prepares you for these words in Revelation. And then there is the
slave who doesn’t want to be set free, so they punch a hole through the
lobe of his ear and he serves his master “forever” (Exodus 21:2–6). The
rest of the Bible prepares you to understand this fire and smoke that goes
up forever and ever (see also the section in Chapter Nine on “How
Sinners Die the Second Death”).
Lou: So you’re saying that I have to interpret the Bible to find its
real meaning. I can’t just take the surface meaning of texts. Each text has
a context and a history, so I have to work at understanding Scripture.
Graham: When people say, “We must take that text just the way
it reads,” I often say, “Well, let’s turn over here to Deuteronomy where
it says, ‘Take the tithe and buy strong drink with it and rejoice before
the Lord’” (Deuteronomy 14:22–26).
And they’ll say, “Oh no, don’t take that text just the way it reads;
let’s interpret that with care.”
And then we turn to the text where it says, “Give wine to the
poor, that they may forget their misery” (based on Proverbs 31:6–7).
And they will say, “No, let’s interpret that.”
Then we go to, “It would be better not to marry; but it’s all right
if you can’t control yourself” (based on 1 Corinthians 7:36–37).
“Oh, let’s interpret that.”
“Women shouldn’t speak in church” (based on 1 Corinthians
14:34–35).
“Let’s interpret that.”
Then we come to the third angel’s message and they say, “Let’s
take it just how it reads.”
 When it comes to the Bible, we need to be consistent all the way
through. We want to find the true meaning, we don’t want to cheat. We
want to know exactly what it means. And it takes the whole of the Bible
to do that.
Lou: Now in light of this book’s theme that there is no need to be
afraid of God, I have to ask; how can you preach the three angels’ messages without inspiring fear? Even the first angel’s message sounds a
note of judgment (Revelation 14:7). That makes one feel a bit uneasy.
And after that comes the second and the third. How can you preach
judgment, even in the first, without producing fear?
Graham: This is a very good illustration of the points we made
before. We need to interpret texts like these. We did some of this in
Chapter Nine, the one entitled “There Is No Need to Be Afraid of
God.” We talked about judgment there. People interpret the concept of
judgment in various ways. Those who prefer a more legal model of atonement will say, “There is no need to be afraid in the judgment, because we
have a Friend up there.” But they don’t mean the Father, they mean the
Son. Or they may say, “We have no need to be afraid, because the legal
penalty has been paid. The Father is fearsome, but if you’re paid up you
don’t have to worry.”
I believe the good news that we don’t have to be afraid is based on
the fact that our Friend up there is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. All
three are our friends. That’s the best reason for facing the judgment
unafraid.
Lou: You’ve challenged us to the hard work of thinking, yet you’ve
still said the message is simple enough that a child can understand. If
that’s true, then how is it that people have so many different versions of
the gospel, even within our own fellowship? Why is there so much disagreement, often generating more heat than light, over the gospel? Why
isn’t it so simple that everyone can say, “Oh yes, fine, that’s it, I agree.”
Graham: Well, Paul seemed to think it was simple. He says, “Since
the death of Christ was explained so clearly to you, how could you be
such dear idiots as to go back to the other view?” He even goes so far as
to say, “Who has been casting a spell over you?” or as some versions say,
“Who has bewitched you?” Galatians 3:1. Actually, Paul was right about
that. We cannot leave out the adversary when talking about the gospel.
The gospel is what defeats him. And he is determined to pervert it, not
so much by contradicting it as by twisting it. There are many “twistings” of the good news and the adversary is involved in that. But we also
need to allow for some honest differences. It’s hard to give up our prejudices, so we should be patient with each other. But the day is coming
when we all need to have it clearly worked out, so we can stake our lives
on it and survive the troubles of the End-time. We will have more to say
about that in Chapter Eighteen.
Lou: Is there a sense, though, in which the gospel is such a gem that
we will never fully encompass all of its beauty?
Graham: Oh, I like that. That was good to add. There are always
different facets, but the different facets will not contradict each other.
It’s only worrisome when there’s a contradiction. But no one person will
see it all, nor speak of it in exactly the same way. Yes, that’s very well
said.
Lou: Matthew 24:14 speaks of Jesus’ promise that the gospel will
be preached in all the world. Now if the three angels’ messages are that
gospel and they are to be proclaimed before the End comes, how widely
are these messages being proclaimed and how close are we to that day?
• • • • •
There are many “twistings” of the good news and the
adversary is involved in that. But we also need to allow
for some honest differences. It’s hard to give up our prejudices, so we should be patient with each other.
• • • • •
Graham: An even more important question would be: Suppose we
could document that the three angels’ messages were being broadcast to
the entire world, how sure could we be that we’re giving them correctly? To me that would be the more worrisome thing, because there are different versions of how people understand them. But even if we knew
they were being given correctly, would we ever be able to tell the day
when Jesus will come? I don’t think we’ll ever know. We just need to
give the message and go on giving it, and the Lord will know when the
work is done.
Lou: And when He comes, we will know that it was completed.
Graham: Paul was much less concerned to know when it would be
finished than that it would be finished. He said, “I want to get to you in
Rome and beyond; I’d like to get everywhere with this good news”
(based on Romans 15). That should be our preoccupation as well, I think.
Lou: You spoke about the last sentence in the third angel’s message
(Revelation 14:12). Is that really part of the message? The punctuation
seems a bit ambiguous.
Graham: Most commentators believe verse twelve is included in
the third angel’s message, even though in most translations the quotation marks close with verse eleven. But the message of the third angel is
so fearsome, it calls for the endurance of the saints. Perhaps verse twelve
is a response to all three messages, but it especially responds to that
dreadful number three.
Lou: I’m concerned about the wording of verse twelve because it
has been a favorite of mine for many years. In the New International
Version it talks about “remaining faithful to Jesus.” The King James
Version, which I learned many years ago, talks about “having the faith of
Jesus.” How do we interpret that phrase?
Graham: Well, it’s a technical thing, but the Greek can be translated “faith in Jesus” or “the faith that Jesus had.” And that’s why some
versions go one way and some go the other, and none of them are consistent in the way they translate it from one place to another.
Lou: How do you make that kind of choice as a Greek scholar?
Graham: Well, the context will sometimes indicate. At other times,
the context makes no difference either way. In this case, Revelation 13
talks of those who are loyal to the adversary, and Revelation 14 talks of
those who are loyal to the true Christ. So in Revelation 14:12 I like the
translation “faithful to Jesus.” But suppose it’s the other way. “The
saints are those who have a faith in God such as Jesus did” or, “The
saints are those who trust in Jesus.” Either way we come to exactly the
same conclusion. So it really makes no difference. If I were to create my
own version, though, I’d put it, “Remain loyal to, or trust in, Jesus.”
Lou: There’s another word in there: “Here is the patience [emphasis supplied] of the saints” (KJV). Other translations say: “Here is the
endurance of the saints” (RSV, ESV). And still others have “patient
endurance” (NIV).
Graham: That last phrase is an interesting combination of patience
and endurance. One possible translation is “patience,” as in “I am patiently waiting for the Lord to come; don’t disturb me.” The underlying
Greek word means “remaining under,” as if you were pushing something
or carrying a heavy burden. You put your shoulder to the wheel, you stay
under, and you shove with all your might. That’s the root word here.
“Endurance” is a better English translation. But the New International is
even better, “This calls for patient endurance.” That’s really bridging
both ideas. Patient endurance isn’t easy.
Lou: It strikes me that this phrase is comparable to our colloquial
expression today, “hanging in there.”
Graham: That’s true.
Lou: The third angel’s message refers to a “mark of the beast.”
Revelation 14:9, see also 13:16–17. Many Christians put a lot of emphasis
upon the mark of the beast. It seems to be very important to the message.
So what is it?
Graham: Well, since dreadful things happen to those who have the
mark, we had better know something about it. There are many, many
different answers to your question. We will go into this in more detail in
the next chapter, when we talk about Satan’s final effort to deceive. In
a nutshell, earlier in the book of Revelation it talks about God’s loyal
people having a seal (Revelation 7:1–3). It seems they have some mark of
loyalty and trust. The mark of the beast seems to be comparable to this
seal. Those who have the mark prefer Satan’s lies to the truth. They
have accepted him, the false Christ, as their redeemer. So we need to
identify something that would be an appropriate mark.
If you research Vicarius Filii Dei, a historic papal title, the literal
meaning is “substitute for the Son of God,” which is exactly what Satan
has wanted to be. But I’m more intrigued with the fact that, through the
centuries, you can find the very number 666 connected with devil worship and other misrepresentations of the truth. Whatever it is, the mark
of the beast is connected with rejection of the truth, a preference for
Satan’s lies, and loyalty to him.
We will focus more on these issues in the next chapter. The issues
are more important than the identity of the mark. You won’t get the
mark unless you prefer Satan’s side, so I’m more concerned about being
on the right side, than about what the mark itself might be. Because if
I’m on the right side, I won’t get it.
Lou: Good point. I’m intrigued by the Maxwell version of Romans
3:25–26 that you gave earlier. Why do so many versions translate this
gospel passage as a revelation of God’s activity in salvation rather than
a revelation of God’s character, or the kind of person God is? Is the
gospel the truth about God’s character or the truth about how God
saves us?
Graham: To understand what Paul is saying here, you need to go
back to Romans 1:17–18. According to the Greek of verse seventeen, the
gospel derives its power from the fact that it reveals the righteousness
of God. But then in verse eighteen Paul says, “The wrath of God is
revealed.” The Greek in these two phrases is almost identical. It is God’s
wrath one verse below, and God’s righteousness one verse above. But
many of our good Christian friends say, “Why would God’s righteousness need to be revealed? He’s the Sovereign of all things, of course He’s
righteous.” You see, following Luther’s example, they don’t understand
this text in light of the great controversy over the character and government of God.
In the larger, great controversy view, it’s God’s righteousness that
has been challenged. If God is not proved to be righteous, there is no
basis for us to trust Him. The good news, in that case, is that God is
righteous. Those who are not aware of a conflict over His righteousness,
choose something else, such as, “It’s God’s way of righting you and me.”
What’s beautiful about this, though, is that both ideas are true. If the
good news is about God’s righteousness, then the revelation of God’s
righteousness is the way in which He rights you and me. And so the larger view contains the smaller view, but the narrow view denies the larger
view.
That’s what I like about the larger view of Scripture. You can be
much more generous when you hold it. You can say, with the beautiful
Good News Bible, “God’s way of righting wrong.” That’s beautiful. But
what is God’s way of setting men right with Himself? It is to reveal and
demonstrate the truth about His own righteousness at infinite cost. It is
our privilege to explain the larger great controversy view from all sixtysix books of the Bible. That view allows the Bible to be translated very
literally in Romans 1:16–17, and even leaves room for narrower views
which are more focused on what God has done for you and me. To many
of our friends, the good news is primarily what God has done for you and
me, the plan of salvation. The larger view, on the other hand, is the good
news that God is not as His enemies have made Him out to be. And to
see Him like that is to be won to repentance and faith. The plan of salvation has at its very heart the revelation and the demonstration of the
truth about the righteousness of God. That’s a more inclusive view.
That’s why we venture sometimes to call it the “Larger View.”
Lou: Another question: “I understand that the wrath of Satan
(Revelation 12:12, 17) and the wrath of God (Revelation 14:10; 15:1) are
based on the same word in the original language. How can we fit Satan’s
wrath into the picture you are helping us to see regarding God’s wrath?
Or could it be that I am misinformed regarding the original language?”
Graham: Yes, the two main words for “wrath” in the Greek are
orge and thumos. Both words are used for God (in Revelation 14:10) and
for Satan (in Revelation 12:12, 17), the same words. Similarly, the word
“faith” is used for “saving faith” or “trust” (Romans 3:28) and also for the
frightened kind of faith the devils have ( James 2:19). The only difference
is that when God expresses His wrath, He sadly gives us up. When the
Devil comes down with great wrath he comes “like a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour” (1 Peter 5:8). That’s the difference between the
two. Same words, different context. The context indicates the meaning.
Lou: It has to do with the kind of person the Devil is and the kind
of person that God is. Because their characters are different, their expres-
sions of wrath are also different.
Graham: That’s the difference.
• • • • •
God expresses His wrath by sadly giving us up. When the
Devil comes down with great wrath, he comes “like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.” 1 Peter 5:8.
That’s the difference between the two.
• • • • •
Lou: All right. Another friend has raised this question. I think it’s
a very important one. “Are we going to have the same freedom that
Adam and Eve had when we go to heaven — free to choose, perfect freedom of choice?” What about this matter of freedom which you have
stressed so much?
Graham: Well, when you think of the price God has paid to show
what freedom means to Him, and to restore freedom, you could say,
“Absolutely, yes.” The end of the conflict doesn’t mean that freedom is
gone, to the contrary.
Lou: Let’s move very quickly to one other question: “Why wasn’t
the conflict ended with Christ’s victory at the cross and His resurrection? Why has pain and suffering gone on since then?” We have covered
this before, but it may help to review it here.
Graham: The fact that this issue keeps coming up suggests how
important it is. We will address it again at some length in “God Waits
for His Children to Grow Up” (Chapter Eighteen). In the narrower,
more legal view, if it’s done at the cross, why wait any longer? In the
larger, great controversy view, there are terrible events to occur at the
End, and there will need to be a mature generation — not a generation of
children, or even the “dear idiots” of Galatia. Galatians 3:1. There needs
to be a group of Jobs who are so grown up and settled into the truth,
that like Paul they could say, “If even an angel from heaven should come
with a different gospel,” pretending to be Christ, “he is wrong and we
will not believe it” (Galatians 1:8–9). So God in mercy waits.
Lou: Our next chapter is “Satan’s Final Effort to Deceive.” What
more important subject could we study to be prepared for these final
days?
Graham: I considered putting that chapter before this one, but I
wanted to do the good news first. Having said that, it is a truly important subject for the times in which we live.
• • • • •
The Good News
God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out
to be— arbitrary, unforgiving, and severe. Jesus said, “If you have
seen Me, you have seen the Father.” God is just as loving and
trustworthy as His Son, just as willing to forgive and heal. Though
infinite in majesty and power, our Creator is an equally gracious
Person who values nothing higher than the freedom, the dignity,
and the individuality of His intelligent creatures— that their love,
their faith, their willingness to listen and obey may be freely given.
He even prefers to regard us not as servants but as friends.
This is the truth revealed through all the books of Scripture.
This is the everlasting Good News that wins the trust and admiration of God’s loyal children throughout the universe.
• • • • •
