Chapter Eighteen
God Waits for His Children to Grow Up
Almost two thousand years have passed since God won His case on
Calvary. Satan’s lies and accusations have long ago been met. The freedom of the universe has been eternally secured. So why do you think
God still tolerates this one rebellious spot in His loyal universe? All the
rest of its inhabitants have been convinced. We know that He longs to
recreate our world, as described in Isaiah, Revelation, and elsewhere,
and give it to His trusting saints. Why, then, does God still wait?
When Jesus returns, He will come to a generation of believers who
have experienced Satan’s final desperate attempt to deceive and destroy
God’s loyal children on this planet. This generation of believers will
have accomplished something that one-third of the brilliant angels failed
to do. They will have refused to be turned against God by Satan’s lies.
They will have been able to say with Paul, “If anyone, if even an angel
from heaven, should come with a different version of the everlasting
good news, a different picture of God, he is wrong and we will not
believe it” (based on Galatians 1:8–9).
The Seriousness of the End-Time
God does not want us to underestimate the seriousness of these
final times of confusion and deception. He does not want us to underestimate Satan’s cunning and persuasive power. So there are vivid descriptions of this time to come, both in the Old Testament and the New,
even beyond the ones we have examined earlier. One of these texts is
near the end of the book of Daniel:
There will be a time of distress such as has not happened from
the beginning of nations until then. But at that time your people—
everyone whose name is found written in the book— will be delivered. . . . Those who are wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens, and those who lead many to righteousness, like the stars for ever
and ever. Daniel 12:1, 3, NIV.
The time of distress mentioned here reminds us of Revelation 13,
where the whole world will worship the adversary except those whose
names are written in the Lamb’s book of life (Revelation 13:8). But notice
that the saints not only survive this time of deception and confusion,
they are described as leading others to righteousness (Daniel 12:3). Our
concern toward the End is not only to survive, but to bear an encouraging witness to the truth about our God. Compare Daniel with Paul’s picture of the End in 1 Timothy:
The Spirit clearly says that in later times some will abandon the
faith and follow deceiving spirits and things taught by demons. Such
teachings come through hypocritical liars, whose consciences have been
seared as with a hot iron. They forbid people to marry and order them
to abstain from certain foods, which God created to be received with
thanksgiving by those who believe and who know the truth. 1 Timothy
4:1–3, NIV.
The last sentence in this passage offers examples of the kinds of
things that will misrepresent God in the last days. Satan has accused our
God of being arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. So
in the name of God, religious leaders order people to abstain from certain
foods for arbitrary ceremonial and spiritual reasons. They also forbid
people to marry. Wouldn’t the Devil love to have us forget how and
why God gave us marriage in the Garden of Eden? Marriage is such an
eloquent representation of God’s willingness to share His creative power
with us, enabling us to create little people in our own image. What an
answer to Satan’s charge that a selfish God refuses to share His creative
power! Satan would love for us to forget the evidence of God’s character
that marriage provides.
Compare these texts with Paul’s very dramatic description of
Satan’s purposes and methods in the last days (2 Thessalonians 2). It’s a
shame to leave out anything in that whole chapter, but let’s focus on
just the heart of it:
Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. . . . Don’t let
anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not come until the
rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed. . . . He opposes
and exalts himself over everything that is called God or is worshiped,
and even sets himself up in God’s temple, proclaiming himself to be
God. . . . And now you know what is holding him back. . . . For the secret
power of lawlessness is already at work; but the one who now holds it
back will continue to do so till he is taken out of the way. . . . The com-
ing of the lawless one will be in accordance with the work of Satan displayed in all kinds of counterfeit miracles, signs and wonders, and in
every sort of evil that deceives those who are perishing. They perish
because they refused to love the truth and so be saved. 2 Thessalonians
2:1, 3–4, 6–7, 9–10, NIV.
Notice that the consequences of rebellion are lawlessness (compare
1 John 3:4) and false worship (Matthew 4:8–10; Romans 1:18–23;
Revelation 13:8). In 2 Thessalonians 2 there is deceit on Satan’s side and
truth on God’s side. Because truth and evidence are not on the adversary’s side, Satan cannot use evidence. He does not dare invite inquiry
and investigation, the way God can with perfect safety and freedom. In
order to win his case, the Devil always has to use things like counterfeit
miracles, signs, and wonders to persuade.
What God Is Waiting For
The people who survive this period of extreme deception and confusion are certainly not babes in the truth. Rather, they are grown-up,
adult believers. They are models of perfection and Christian maturity.
They have had their faculties trained by practice to distinguish good
from evil. Though their faith is severely tried, they do not let God
down. Their faith is deeper than that of a little child. Little children
need a lot of protection. But these saints, like Job, can stand alone.
• • • • •
God knows that if these final, awesome, closing events are
allowed to come too soon, His children would not be ready.
He would never allow anyone to be tested more than they
are able to bear. So He waits.
• • • • •
I understand that God is waiting for the development of such firm
believers. He waits in mercy because He loves His children. He is not
willing that any of them should be lost. God knows that if these final,
awesome, closing events are allowed to come too soon, His children
would not be ready. They would be confused, and some would be
deceived. He would never allow anyone to be tested more than they are
able to bear (1 Corinthians 10:13). So He waits.
The last book of the Bible pictures angels mercifully holding back
the final winds of strife until God’s children have been sealed and settled
into the truth. It makes sense that He should do so. It is consistent with
what we know to be true about our God:
After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the
earth, holding back the four winds of the earth, that no wind might
blow on earth or sea or against any tree. Then I saw another angel
ascend from the rising of the sun, with the seal of the living God, and
he called with a loud voice to the four angels. . . . “Do not harm the
earth or the sea or the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God
upon their foreheads.” Revelation 7:1–3, RSV.
The closing events of human history are being held back because
we have not yet been sealed. But what would sealing have meant to the
early Christians who heard this section of Revelation being read out
loud to them? Let’s imagine a congregation in Ephesus. After all, that is
where the scroll would have arrived from the Island of Patmos. Someone
arose and read it out loud to the congregation. No doubt they were
familiar with Paul’s letter that eventually became known as the letter to
the Ephesians. And in the letter to the Ephesians, Paul has quite a lot to
say about the sealing and how this is the work of the Holy Spirit. For
example: “Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were
sealed for the day of redemption.” Ephesians 4:30, NIV. How is the
Holy Spirit involved in our being sealed?
In him [ Christ] you also, who have heard the word of truth, the
gospel [good news] of your salvation, and have believed in him, were
sealed with the promised Holy Spirit. . . .Ephesians 1:13, RSV.
Note the combination of truth, the gospel, salvation, faith and the
sealing work of the Holy Spirit. What is this truth? What is this good
news? That is the subject of all twenty chapters of this book. The truth,
the good news, is that God is not the kind of person His enemies have
made Him out to be. See how Paul clarifies that: “I keep asking that the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, may give you the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation, so that you may know Him better.”
Ephesians 1:17, NIV. Notice the last phrase, “know Him better.” That
is the truth. That is the good news. That is the work of the Spirit of
Truth. The Holy Spirit comes to lead us into truth so that we might
know the Father better. This is also a theme in the Gospel of John:
The Holy Spirit. . . will be your teacher and will bring to your
minds all that I have said to you. . . . But when the Helper comes, that
is, the Spirit of truth,. . . he will speak plainly about me. And you
yourselves will also speak plainly about me. . . . (the Spirit) will guide
you into everything that is true. John 14:26; 15:26–27; 16:13, Phillips.
John, who wrote about sealing in Revelation 7, also wrote the
Gospel which includes much information about the Holy Spirit. The
Spirit was coming to guide us into the truth, to convince us of the truth,
to settle us into the truth. John likely also knew about Paul’s letter to
the Ephesians. John knew that the believers would have some background for understanding what it would mean to be sealed. It means, in
the words of Ellen White, to be so settled into the truth, both intellectually and spiritually, that one cannot be moved. Ellen G. White, Last
Day Events, 219; SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 4, 1161.
Settled Into the Truth
What truth can we be so settled into that despite the Devil’s most
convincing efforts to the contrary, we cannot be moved? Is it the truth
that God exists and that He is infinitely powerful? Well, the devils
believe that and it scares them ( James 2:19). Is it the truth that the End
is coming soon? Satan agrees that it is coming soon (Revelation 12:12),
and he works all the harder. He is settled into those two things. Is it the
truth that the seventh day is the Sabbath? Is it the truth that we should
keep all ten of the commandments, that we should read our Bibles faithfully as God’s word? Is it the truth that we should pay a careful tithe, be
very careful about what we eat, and be very careful how we associate
with sinners who might lead us astray?
I don’t want to minimize those matters, but they are not enough in
themselves. All of the above were believed and practiced by the very
ones who put Jesus on the cross. After Jesus died, they rushed home to
keep the seventh-day Sabbath holy, with their tithe paid up and no forbidden food in their stomachs. Evidently the truth into which we must
be sealed is far more than just the list of beliefs I mentioned above,
important as they are.
Throughout the Bible, the all-important truth, the saving truth, is
above all else the truth about our God. Jesus came to bring us this truth
about His Father, so that we might be won back to God in love and trust.
It is the truth that God can heal and save all who trust Him. When the
Spirit comes, He will bring to our remembrance the things that Jesus has
said about the Father (John 14:26). The Holy Spirit comes so that we
may know God better (Ephesians 1:17). That’s the consistent picture of
the truth that runs all through Scripture.
Do we really accept Jesus’ picture of the Father? Jesus is very specific. In John 16 He makes a statement about His Father that has no symbols, figures of speech or parables in it. He says, “The time has come for
Me to tell you plainly and clearly about My Father. There is no need for
Me to pray to the Father for you. For the Father Himself loves you”
(John 16:25–27). Do you accept that? Do you accept it to the extent that
it’s an integral part of your whole theology and understanding of the
plan of salvation? Or are you still unable to accept what Jesus described
as a plain, clear statement of the truth about His Father? There is no
need for the Son to plead with the Father in our behalf, because the
Father loves us just as much as the Son does.
Let’s recall other things that Jesus said. The Spirit brings these sayings back to our remembrance (John 14:26). “If you’ve seen Me, you’ve
seen the Father” (John 14:9). “If you know Me, you know the Father”
(John 14:7). Do we really believe that the Father is just as gracious as the
Son? Is that an integral part of our Christian theology? Did anyone need
to reconcile Christ Jesus to us as sinners? Did anything need to be done
to assuage and appease the wrath of Jesus and win Him to our side?
Then if we believe Jesus’ testimony about the Father, nothing had to be
done to reconcile the Father to us either. He loves us just as much as the
Son does. Are we so settled into this truth about our God that we cannot be moved? Or are we still easily swayed to and fro by every wind of
doctrine? Back to Ephesians:
We are no longer to be children, tossed by the waves and whirled
about by every fresh gust of teaching, dupes of crafty rogues and their
deceitful schemes. No, let us speak the truth in love; so shall we fully
grow up into Christ. Ephesians 4:14–15, NEB.
We should ask ourselves: Are we still such children in the faith that
we need emergency measures in order to be reverent toward God and to
do what is right? If we still need those emergency measures, we are still
babes in the truth. That’s why Paul, in the book of Hebrews, wrote:
Anyone who lives on milk, being still an infant, is not acquainted
with the teaching about righteousness. But solid food is for the mature,
who by constant use have trained themselves to distinguish good from
evil. Therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about Christ and
go on to maturity. . . . Hebrews 5:13–14; 6:1, NIV.
What are the elementary teachings about Christ? Well, let us ask
ourselves. Do we still need the law in order to love God and love each
other? Do we need it to keep us from hating and murdering our enemies?
Would we murder them if there was no law to say we must not do it? If
it’s the law that keeps you from murdering your mother-in-law, then you
are still very much a child and not ready for the awful “time of trouble”
that is coming (Daniel 12:1; Revelation 7:14).
Mature Obedience
Let me ask it another way. Which moves you more, the thunders of
Sinai (Exodus 19:16–19) or the still small voice of truth (1 Kings 19:11–
12)? Satan is going to bring great thunder and fire from heaven in the
sight of men; miracles and wonders (2 Thessalonians 2:8–10; Revelation
13:13–14). If that is what moves us, then we are very vulnerable. We’re
still babes in the truth. God has used those methods with babes, but He
waits for us to grow up. The one thing that the Devil cannot produce is
the still small voice of truth, for the truth is not with him. We must be
ready to recognize truth as the supreme authority.
Do you obey because God has told you to, and He has the power to
reward and destroy? That’s the obedience of a little child. Do you obey
because God has told you to, and you love Him and want to please Him?
Is that the only reason why you don’t murder your enemies? Because it
upsets Him and you’d rather please Him? That’s sweet, but still the
faith of a little child. Or do you do what is right, because it is right? Do
we offer God the intelligent, agreeing obedience of free, grown-up children? That is what pleases Him the most. With mature obedience like
that, we are ready for the days to come.
• • • • •
Do we offer God the intelligent, agreeing obedience of free,
grown-up children? That is what pleases Him the most.
With mature obedience like that, we are ready for the days
to come.
• • • • •
Are we still preoccupied with our own salvation, with what God
has done for us? Or do we see the plan of salvation in its larger perspective, a plan that involves the whole universe? In the great controversy
view, Jesus Christ died on the cross to demonstrate the truth about our
heavenly Father that will establish this universe safe and free for all eternity. It is that truth which also saves us, but there was a far larger purpose in the plan of salvation than just to save you and me.
Do you still demand vengeance on your enemies — tit for tat, an eye
for an eye? Of course, you wouldn’t call it that. You would call it justice.
But is that really what it is? Do you demand that your enemies suffer all
that they deserve in the final fires of the End, or you will not be satisfied?
Would you lose respect for a God who would do anything less? Do you
demand that wicked people get precisely what they deserve, or you will
not be satisfied?
Or are you ready to join our heavenly Father as He cries, watching
His rebellious children reap the consequences of their own rebellious
choices? God does not turn His back on His sinful children. He watches
them as they die. He is not torturing them to death. He leaves them to
reap the consequences of their own choices. I would dare suggest that if
you still desire vengeance at the End, though you may call it justice, you
are acting like a little child.
Biblical Examples of Maturity
When Saul of Tarsus (Paul) was a grown-up man and the religious
leader of his people, he came to realize that in his legalistic theology he
was still a little child. He had assumed he was doing God a favor when
he helped stone Stephen to death (Acts 7:58–8:1). But when he learned
the truth about God, he began to grow up and put away childish things.
He wrote: “When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a
child, I reasoned like a child; when I became a man, I gave up childish
ways.” 1 Corinthians 13:11, RSV. In the context of 1 Corinthians 13,
maturity is defined as love. We’ll come back to that in the Question and
Answer section at the end of this chapter.
Now there is a time in life when it’s appropriate to be a child, to
believe what we are told, and even to do what we are told. But while we
are still children, since the enemy of God and man is abroad in the land,
we need much protection. We need God’s emergency measures to help
us believe and do what is right (see Chapter Eleven). God has been will-
ing to give them to us and we thank Him for them. But in the last days,
there will be no protection. Satan will twist all of God’s emergency
measures to support his own position, and to put God in a very bad light.
In those days, we will really need to be grown-up.
• • • • •
In the last days, Satan will twist all of God’s emergency
measures to support his own position, and to put God in a
very bad light. In those days we will really need to be
grown-up.
• • • • •
Job was grown-up. But consider the ways in which Satan sought to
break him down and undermine his trust in God. God said in Job 1 and
2, for important great controversy reasons, “Satan, you may do anything
you like to this man, except take his life. He will not let Me down (Job
2:3–6).” Satan set out to destroy Job. He destroyed his family. He
destroyed his estate. He destroyed his reputation. He destroyed his
health. Then he set out to undermine Job’s theology, his picture of God.
Three or four friends came to help him. But those friends did not know
God very well, although they thought they did. In fact, the God they
worshiped was arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. If
only those friends had known the Larger View, the Great Controversy,
what we now know from Job, chapters 1 and 2. Think how they could
have helped and blessed poor Job. Instead, Job said, “Miserable comforters are you all” (Job 16:2). They were only making things worse.
Perhaps the greatest distress that came to Job came from the bad theology of his well-meaning, but mistaken friends. Caring theologians, who
did not know God but had a very legal view of things, caused Job great
distress. But he would not be deceived, even by them.
Maturity in the Last Days
In the last days, our experience will be very much like that of Job.
If we do not have a bigger perspective, based on all sixty-six books of the
Bible, we will not be ready for what is coming. Unless we are grounded
in the universe-wide understanding of God, the Great Controversy and
the plan of salvation, we will be no help to ourselves. We will be very
vulnerable when Satan seeks to deceive us, when he tells us that God is
an arbitrary, vengeful Deity. And we will be no help to anyone else.
It seems to me that a great deal of current Christian theology is pre-
occupied with our legal standing before God. Is that why God still waits
until we grow up into a much larger understanding of the truth? For
without that larger understanding of the truth, we will never survive
the time of trouble that is coming. That’s why Paul says, “Put on the
whole armor that God has supplied, and particularly the armor of truth.”
And in Ephesians 6 he places that theme in the context of the Great
Controversy:
Put on all the armour which God provides, so that you may be
able to stand firm against the devices of the devil. For our fight is not
against human foes, but against cosmic powers [Satan and his
angels], against the authorities and potentates of this dark world,
against the superhuman forces of evil in the heavens. Therefore,
take up God’s armour; then you will be able to stand your ground
when things are at their worst, to complete every task and still to
stand. Stand firm, I say. Fasten on the belt of truth [emphases
supplied]. Ephesians 6:11–14, NEB.
We know what that truth is: the good news about our God.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: The title of this chapter leads to the question:
“How much longer do you think God is going to wait?”
Graham Maxwell: I think that subject is so important that it’s the
topic for the entire next chapter: “How Soon Will the Conflict Be
Over?”
Lou: The idea of waiting also raises the question: “How is He waiting? Is God Himself uncertain about just how and when things will turn
out? How does this relate to God’s knowledge about the future?”
Graham: My personal preference is not to limit God’s knowledge
of the past, present or future in any way. I believe He knows precisely
when He’s coming, but He speaks of waiting, and in some places He
speaks of delay. We’ll cover those texts in the next chapter. The language of waiting indicates to us what is most important to Him. He will
not come until the conditions are right. It does not suggest that He’s
ignorant of these matters.
Lou: The idea of growing up raises another question: Most congregations include people at different ages and different stages of spiritual
growth. Won’t there always be babes in the truth, people who need to
grow up, new converts? How could it ever happen that everybody will
be all grown up at the very same time? What exactly is God waiting for?
Graham: That’s why we included a whole chapter on perfection
(Chapter Fourteen). Some in the church have made perfection almost
unattainable, but I would define perfection as growing up, God healing
the damage done by sin. Everything depends on what it means to be
grown up. One does not have to be thirty or fifty or ninety to be grown
up. I’m impressed with the maturity of Jesus at the age of twelve. He
was so settled into the truth that, when He talked with the theologians
of the day, He understood things better than they did. Perhaps we think
maturing takes a long time, because we’ve made the truth too complicated. I think we will be amazed at how young people and new converts will
be immovably committed to the truth that God is different than His enemies have made Him out to be. If we rightly understand what it means
to be grown up and settled into the truth, it would make this much more
attainable in the End.
Lou: I hear you suggesting that what really matters is simple, and
yet profoundly important.
Graham: Both of those things, just the way you said it. The simplest statement is about the sublime truth that holds the universe together.
Lou: It seems there is a bit of incongruity in the Scripture. It talks
about us growing up (Ephesians 4:13–15), but then suggests we become
like little children (Matthew 18:3–4). If we’re not like little children, we
can’t enter the Kingdom of Heaven. Jesus places a high priority on being
like little children, yet you’re saying, “Why don’t you grow up?” What
do you do with those references?
Graham: Consider the context in Matthew where Jesus makes that
statement. His audience was misbehaving, so He takes a little child and
says, “Unless you’re at least like this, you’ll not see the Kingdom”
(Matthew 18:1–4). And I don’t think we should ever lose that childlike
trust, the curiosity, the willingness to listen, the willingness to learn. I
think that is never to be lost. But Ephesians also says that we should not
remain as children, requiring much protection (Ephesians 4:13–15). We
should become adults who can stand on our own. I think it’s marvelous
to see mature people in their seventies, eighties, and nineties who still
have the curiosity, interest and trust of a little child.
Lou: That does lead to another question: “Is it possible for a person
to tell that he or she is in fact growing up?”
Graham: This contrast between genuine love and the behavior of
children gives us some ways to tell if we are growing up. In 1
Corinthians 13 Paul says, “I once thought like a child, but now I’ve
given up childish ways” (1 Corinthians 13:11). Think of how little children boast, and how impatient and demanding they often are. The rest
of the chapter, in contrast, explains how a grown-up behaves. Grownups love. Love is never rude, never impatient, never arrogant, never
boasts, never insists on having its own way.
I think there’s an additional thing to consider. Why am I behaving
the way I do? Am I doing it because somebody in authority has told me
to, and He has the power to reward and destroy? Or am I sold on Paul’s
message of love? In 1 Corinthians 13 Paul is describing how Jesus
behaved. Not only that, ultimately he is telling us what God the Father
is like (John 14:9; 1 John 4:8). In the end, maturity means to want to be
like God. As I mature, God doesn’t have to tell me not to murder my
mother-in-law anymore (by the way, my mother-in-law died before I met
my wife, so this illustration is not personal). I no longer like the idea
myself, you see. Eventually we will do what is right because it is right.
We become like the God we worship. That’s all part of growing up.
Lou: Are you saying, then, that there is a certain legitimacy in evaluating the way we act, or the way we feel about other people?
Graham: I think if we see no progress at all on these matters over
the past year, we should be concerned.
Lou: But there’s a certain danger in focusing on our growth, isn’t
there? You don’t grow by trying to grow or by looking at yourself and
hoping to grow. And how can you avoid the self-confidence of the
Laodiceans, who felt very content with their spiritual situation?
Graham: One of the evidences that one is growing up is that one is
becoming less and less arrogant. It’s little children that insist, “My
daddy says it, and he’s bigger than your daddy, and therefore it’s true.”
It would be a mark of great immaturity for an adult to talk like that.
Boasting and arrogance suggest one is still a child. For someone to say, “I
think I’ve almost made it now,” suggests they may not have even started. On the other hand, humility and the willingness to listen should
become even greater as one gets older.
Lou: Changing the subject a little, will we know if and when we
have been sealed?
Graham: Well, if we understand that we are sealed by the Spirit,
we can look for the fruits of the Spirit (Galatians 5:22–23). One of these
fruits is a great concern for truth (Ephesians 5:9). Another fruit of the
Spirit is love (Galatians 5:22). And love does not insist on its own way (1
Corinthians 13:5, ESV, RSV). All the fruits enter into the reckoning.
The more I am perceiving and liking the truth, the more I’m willing to
stake my life on this conviction about God. Then I realize the Spirit is
having His way in my life. However, I must check my convictions by
Scripture, where I got them from in the first place. I must continually
submit my convictions to the correction of the Scriptures that were
inspired by the Spirit.
The key is to be more and more settled into this picture of God, not
just as an opinion but as something we would stake our lives on. Over
time we will see that it is really affecting the way we behave and treat
other people. Then one could say, “God, I thank You for the Spirit. He’s
evidently having some success with me.”
• • • • •
To receive the seal of God is to be so settled into the truth,
both intellectually and spiritually, that one cannot be
moved. Conversely, to receive the “mark of the beast” is to
be so settled into the lie, that you’ve completely substituted
Satan’s lies for the truth.
• • • • •
Lou: When you talk about the seal of God, that reminds me of
another phrase that you commented on. What really is the “mark of the
beast”?
Graham: In Revelation the sealing is mentioned first, then the mark
of the beast. If the seal is a symbol of loyalty to God, then the mark of
the beast is a symbol of loyalty to the opposition. To receive the seal of
God is to be so settled into the truth, both intellectually and spiritually,
that one cannot be moved. Conversely, to receive the mark of the beast
is to be so settled into the lie, that you’ve completely substituted Satan’s
lies for the truth. To receive the mark of the beast is to be so settled into
Satan’s false picture of God that not even the Spirit of God could move
us. So in essence, both the seal and the mark represent an inner commitment for eternity with respect to the truth about God.
Lou: For many of us Seventh-day Adventists, the seal of God has
been tied very closely to the Sabbath. In fact, I myself have said that the
seal of God is the Sabbath. But I hear you making a distinction between
the Sabbath and the seal.
Graham: One has to stop and realize that the people who crucified
Christ kept the seventh-day Sabbath scrupulously. Did they have the
seal of God? They certainly were not settled into the truth about God.
When Jesus brought the truth about God, they said He had a devil
(John 7:20; 8:48), and they killed Him to silence His witness. On the
other hand, the Sabbath reminds us of the things God has done.
Knowing, intelligent, thoughtful observance of the seventh day is a
reminder of all these great demonstrations of the truth about God. So in
that sense, the Sabbath could be an outward expression of one’s settling
into this truth about our God.
Lou: So the Sabbath has something to do with very deep understanding and experience.
Graham: Yes. When the issues in the Great Controversy are clearly
seen, the preference for a substitute Sabbath could suggest preference
for, even faith in, the one who wants to “be like the Most High” (Satan
— 2 Thessalonians 2:4). But not until then.
Lou: You made reference at the beginning to 1 Timothy 4:1–3. It
says some interesting things about forbidding marriage and certain foods.
With regard to marriage, didn’t Paul go so far as to say that we shouldn’t
marry (1 Corinthians 7:25–28), and didn’t he write 1 Timothy too?
Graham: Well, by selecting random texts you can prove anything
you like from the Bible. But if you take Paul’s comments on marriage in
the full setting of 1 Corinthians, he has nothing against marriage whatsoever. In fact, at weddings, whose writings do we quote more than the
writings of Paul? He said the nicest things about love and marriage. So
one needs to read that part of 1 Corinthians as a description of an emergency; his advice about marriage was an emergency measure at that particular time. It’s not fair to Paul, or to the meaning of marriage, to pluck
verses out of their setting.
Lou: This reference to food in 1 Timothy 4, however, makes me
wonder. The Seventh-day Adventist Church has had a message about
food and health. Could 1 Timothy be talking about that?
Graham: That text is sometimes used against us. We certainly do
have some things to say about food. But we don’t teach people to avoid
certain foods for arbitrary, ceremonial reasons. Through the centuries
there have been religious organizations that have forbidden marriage and
certain foods for ceremonial and religious reasons. That’s all 1 Timothy
4 is talking about.
Lou: So you are saying it’s quite a different thing to emphasize con-
cerns about food for health reasons.
Graham: That’s right. Paul in Timothy is not discussing health at
all. He is discussing arbitrary ceremonial restrictions that put God in a
bad light.
Lou: Moving in another direction, you refer to Job frequently. But
why would you use Job as a model, when at the end of the book he talks
about repenting? That sounds like somebody who has been wrong and is
saying, “I’m sorry. I’m a sinner.” How could Job be a good model when
he is repenting?
Graham: A lot of folk, I think, misunderstand Job when they summarize with that statement. Job says, “I repent.” And they say, “The
friends were right; they said he should repent.” You see, many people
who read Job actually side with the friends. Those who take the narrow,
legal view are more comfortable with the theology of Job’s friends than
the theology of God in the book. But they fail to read on. After Job says,
“I repent,” God says, “Don’t. You have done a beautiful job. You have
said of Me what is right and those theologians have not” (Job 42:6–8).
Why then did Job say, “I repent”?
“God,” he says, “I have spoken of many things beyond my understanding. I wouldn’t say it the same way next time” (Job 42:2).
And God says back to him, “Look, We’re sympathetic up here.
You’ve lost your family, lost your estate, lost your reputation and you
are sitting on a dung heap with your clothes torn and your body covered
with boils. We didn’t expect eloquent speeches from you. We think
under the circumstances you did magnificently, Job! We couldn’t be
more proud of you. You have said of Me what is right.”
Job was saying what every preacher could say at the end of every
sermon, “I’m sorry I didn’t do a better job.”
Lou: Someone said the other day that there is actually a condition
in the medical dictionary called theophobia — fear of God. It’s an actual
ailment that a physician might need to be alert to.
Graham: That’s right. Doctors run into it now and then. It is a
morbid fear of the wrath of God. Some saint preaches, “Fear God,” and
doctors have to rush in to cure the theophobia. We’d better tell people
the truth about God. Otherwise, we ministers will be working at odds
with our clinical friends, making people ill with theophobia. We had better bring the good news that there is no need to be afraid of God. Jesus
spent all His life healing the sick. It would be tragic to think about God,
the One who meant to cast out fear, and have that become a theophobic
experience.
• • • • •
God does not ask us to believe anything for which He does
not provide evidence. He urges us to inquire, to investigate. These are the things that a grown-up does.
• • • • •
Lou: You also mentioned Ephesians 4, where it suggests that the
work of the church community is to help people grow up (verses 11–16).
How does a church try to do that? What can a church do to really help
people grow?
Graham: As a pastor, you’ve devoted your life to thinking of ways
to do this. It would be growing up for a member to go from a child-like,
legal, authoritarian view to a larger understanding of freedom and truth.
God does not ask us to believe anything for which He does not provide
evidence. It is evidence that appeals to the reason. He urges us to
inquire, to investigate. These are the things that a grown-up does.
We have to take trusting children and make them independent, but
loving and trusting adults, adults who can withstand what’s coming. I
think one of the first ways to do that is to invite our members to investigate every sermon that they hear. If they go home and investigate, over
time they’ll grow up.
Lou: Toward the close of the previous chapter, you were suggesting some ways in which the Enemy has distorted and perverted Bible
truths. Bible truths can be twisted to offer a terrible picture of God, one
in which God is pictured inaccurately and unfairly. I’d like to turn that
around here and have you suggest how a right understanding of those
same truths can help people to grow up. For example, what is the correct
understanding of faith?
Graham: The Devil would love to have saints understanding faith
as believing what someone in authority tells us; that faith is a leap in the
dark, it’s just believing. Because then he’ll have his way with us. The
truth isn’t on his side. So what he needs is our willingness to believe
without investigation. Genuine faith means trust, a well-founded trust,
based on God’s demonstration of the truth.
Lou: What about the Holy Spirit?
Graham: The same way there. I think the Devil has perverted the
doctrine of the Holy Spirit, offering the Holy Spirit as a shortcut. “You
don’t need the truth; you just need the Spirit.” He teaches that when
you have this indwelling, this feeling that comes up through your body,
the Holy Spirit is taking over. And when the Spirit is in charge, God
will run your life. It sounds so good, but it’s a devilish perversion.
 In contrast, the Bible says, “When the Holy Spirit comes, He will
guide you into all truth” (John 16:13). He will help you investigate, and
He will give you the gift of self-control (Galatians 5:23). So all of these
doctrines can be used both ways. We’ve got to present the Spirit as
bringing independence (John 3:8), teaching us self-control, things like
that.
Lou: What about some of these things you have referred to as
“emergency measures;” like the law? Are you saying that even the law
can be distorted? What is the right place for the law in a healthy, balanced view?
Graham: If we present the great controversy view, we show how
God added these emergency measures when we needed them. Faith does
not deny them, it thanks God for them. The law was given to lead us to
Christ that we may grow up. For some, this is an essential step along the
way. Misunderstood, emergency measures like the law can keep us as
children, and hence vulnerable to Satan’s influences at the End.
Lou: What about the destruction of the wicked?
Graham: If that produces theophobia, it will lead to the obedience
that springs from fear. Such obedience turns us into rebels and certainly
keeps us children. “Love Me, or I’ll kill you” won’t produce real love,
not even in a little child. So we need to see the destruction of the wicked
in light of the cross.
Lou: How about the cross then?
Graham: If the cross is seen as propitiating the anger or winning
the favor of an offended God, it also produces theophobia. Even the cross
can make me afraid of God if presented in that way. “Thank God He’s
forgiven me just now, but I better not give up or you know what He’ll
do to me.”
Lou: What is the healthier view of the cross then?
• • • • •
The healthier view of the cross is as a demonstration that
sin does indeed lead to death; it’s that serious. But the
cross is not torture and execution at the hands of an
angry God. He simply gave up His Son as He will give us
up in the end.
• • • • •
Graham: The healthier view of the cross is as a demonstration that
sin does indeed lead to death; it’s that serious. But the cross is not torture and execution at the hands of an angry God. He simply gave up His
Son as He will give us up in the end. And when the Son died, the Father
cried, as He will cry over us when we die in the end (see section “Three
Questions Regarding the Character of God” in Chapter Eight). So,
rightly understood, there is no need to be afraid of God when we stand
at the foot of the cross. And there is no need to be afraid of God when
we see the destruction of the wicked either.
Lou: How should we understand sin in the larger view of things?
Graham: If we view sin as breaking arbitrary rules, it makes sin
something that God doesn’t like. It offends Him. It makes Him angry, so
He punishes us. That’s a childish view. But in the Larger View, sin is
something that’s really wrong in itself. It is like poison, producing its
own consequences. In that case, the “punishment” for sin is not really
punishment, it is a consequence inherent to the crime itself. Sin leads to
consequences, all the way up to the consequence of death, and God
would prefer to spare us those consequences.
Lou: What about atonement?
Graham: The Devil wants us to view atonement as reconciling
God to us, assuaging His wrath, instead of God winning us back to
Himself. The truth is, God never left us; we left Him.
Lou: Let’s take two more. First, intercession.
Graham: If by intercession we imply that the Father is not our
friend, we’ve driven a wedge between the Father and the Son, and
we’ve made the Father look very unforgiving and severe. So the intercession message could be used by the Devil to turn us against God and
keep us as little children. But it can also be an encouraging message for
those who need it.
Lou: What about the Judgment?
Graham: Again, if the Judgment is seen as arbitrary, or a positive
outcome is seen as dependent on the pleading of Jesus, I think that’s
cruel. The Devil is pleased when we assume that one member of the
Godhead is more friendly than the other two. But a biblical view of judgment focuses more on what God is like and what He is doing for us.
Lou: You could say we just tried to review the first eighteen chapters of the book in the last three minutes here. Hopefully that will prepare us for Chapter Nineteen, “How Soon Will the Conflict Be Over?”
And that has been a topic of conversation for God’s people ever since
John said, “Come soon, Lord Jesus” (Revelation 22:21). I’m looking forward to it.
