Chapter Five
The Record of the Evidence
Without the Bible we would know nothing about the heavenly conflict
in God’s family. Neither would we know about God’s infinitely skillful
and gracious handling of this conflict, this crisis of distrust, in His family.
The Bible is a record of the evidence upon which we base our decision
about God, and whether we find Him worthy of our trust. We have been
assuming so far that the Bible itself can be trusted. But there are legitimate questions that can and have been raised about that through the
years. How do we know that we have the right collection of sixty-six
books? How do we know that the words in those books have been accurately transmitted through the ages? How do we know that they have
been adequately translated? Can you trust the versions of the Bible? And
most important of all, can we have any confidence in our interpretation
of these books and these words? When we have read the entire Bible
through can we say, “I really have seen dependable evidence about my
God”?
Inspiration and the Sixty-Six
First of all, let’s briefly consider the question: Do our Bibles have the
right collection of sixty-six books? Some Bibles, particularly those used by
our Roman Catholic friends, have many more books than that, and these
books together are usually called the Apocrypha. In Catholic Bibles the
dozen or so books of the Apocrypha are often not collected in the middle, but scattered throughout the Old Testament. Now what do you do
when you are visiting a friend who has a Bible with these extra books
and that individual has confidence that his or her Bible is the inspired
word of God? Are you going to say, “Well, your version is not inspired
but mine is”? Would using 2 Timothy clear up the question of whose
Bible is inspired? “All Scripture is inspired by God and profitable for
teaching. . . .” 2 Timothy 3:16, RSV. Does that settle the question? What
books are being referred to as “all Scripture”?
The King James Version of 2 Timothy 3:16 is familiar to many: “All
scripture is given by inspiration of God.” But the early editions of that
same Bible contained all those extra books that are in the Roman Catholic
Bibles. In fact the Apocrypha remained in King James Version Bibles
until 1827. And the reason it was left out in 1827 was that the British
and Foreign Bible Society decided that it didn’t have the funds to continue circulating those Apocryphal books along with the sixty-six books
of the Protestant Bible. So quoting 2 Timothy 3:16 in the KJV won’t
settle the question.
• • • • •
The Bible is a record of the evidence upon which we base
our decision about God, and whether we find Him worthy
of our trust.
• • • • •
Luther was the first translator to gather these extra books together
and put them in the middle, between the Old and New Testaments. His
influential German Bible version had much to do with the rise of the
Reformation. As a Roman Catholic translating from the original, he had
to decide whether or not to include the extra books that were scattered
throughout his Old Testament. So he gathered them together and put
them in the middle with the following notice: “These books are interesting and useful to read, but not for doctrine.” Then when he turned his
attention to the New Testament, you may remember, he came to four
books that he couldn’t fit in there too well either. He didn’t call them
Apocryphal, but saw in them less authority because they “didn’t teach
Christ.” So he put Hebrews, James, Jude and Revelation at the end,
where they remain to this day in German Bibles.
If you are in a Roman Catholic home, of course, your Catholic
friend may say, “Well, my Bible has that verse (2 Timothy 3:16): ‘All
Scripture is inspired of God,’ and since this is my Scripture that verse
proves the inspiration of the Apocrypha.” Before you answer, it is
important to know that the Greek of 2 Timothy can be translated another way, and I believe the context dictates that it be so translated. Look
at how the New English Bible puts it: “Every inspired Scripture
[emphasis supplied] has its use for teaching the truth. . . .” 2 Timothy
3:16, NEB. That means there is such a thing as “uninspired scripture.”
You see, it is very likely that Timothy’s Bible was the Greek Old
Testament, which contained these extra books. And that’s why Paul
had to say to Timothy, “Timothy, you have many books in your possession, but only that scripture which is inspired of God is profitable.”
Notice the total context of what Paul wrote to that young pastor:
But for your part, stand by the truths you have learned and are
assured of. Remember from whom you learned them; remember that
from early childhood you have been familiar with the sacred writings,
which have power to make you wise and lead you to salvation through
faith in Christ Jesus. Every inspired scripture has its use for teaching
the truth and refuting error, or for reformation of manners and discipline in right living, so that the man who belongs to God may be
efficient and equipped for good work of every kind. 2 Timothy 3:14–17,
NEB.
How We Got the Sixty-Six
Now to orthodox Jews, the ones who had the Bible first, the
Scriptures consisted of only the thirty-nine books that make up the
Christian Old Testament many of us are familiar with. Sometimes the
thirty-nine were combined together and counted as twenty-four or
twenty-two. It all began with Moses and the first five. When Moses
came down Mount Sinai, carrying the Ten Commandments, his face was
shining so brightly they couldn’t even look at him (Exodus 34:29). It’s
no wonder that when he said, “I am giving you some dependable messages from the Lord,” there was every reason to take those messages seriously. So they built up a collection of the first five books. These became
known as The Law or The Law of Moses. These five became a standard or
rule among the Israelites, like a miniature canon.
Later on other prophets wrote books, and they were all measured
by the first standard: The Law of Moses. By and by a prophetic collection
developed and we had The Law and The Prophets. And then other books
came along known as The Writings, or The Psalms. These were compared
with The Prophets and with The Law until finally there were thirty-nine
books, divided into three canons: The Law, The Prophets and The
Writings; or The Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, (since Psalms was
the first book in the third canon).
The New Testament consistently recognized these three canons
without any question as to their dependability. Look at what Jesus told
His disciples: “Everything written about me in the law of Moses and
the prophets and the psalms [emphasis supplied] must be fulfilled.”
Luke 24:44, RSV. There are times in the New Testament when writers
shortened The Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms down to just The Law
and The Prophets. Sometimes they shorten it clear down to simply “The
Law.” So sometimes in the New Testament “The Law” means the whole
Old Testament.
Look at some examples of these. First of all, in Matthew 5 “the law
and the prophets” means the whole Old Testament:
Think not that I have come to abolish the law and the
prophets; I’ve not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. For truly,
I say to you, till heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot,
will pass from the law until all is accomplished [emphases supplied].
Matthew 5:17–18, RSV.
Sometimes we make the mistake of assuming that “the law” in verse
18 must be the Ten Commandments. But Jesus is actually talking about
the whole Old Testament under the name of “The Law.” Another illustration of that is the reference in John 10: “Jesus answered them, ‘Is it
not written in your law, “I said, you are gods?”’” John 10:34, RSV.
Jesus was quoting Psalm 82:6 here, but He called the Psalms “your law.”
And He goes on to declare His confidence in the Old Testament: “Jesus
answered. . . . ‘We know that what the scripture says is true forever.’”
John 10:35, GNT. It seems to me that Christ’s confidence in the Old
Testament should be of great significance to a Christian.
You can see these three canons of Scripture; The Law, The
Prophets and The Writings; developing already in Old Testament times:
When men tell you to consult mediums and spiritists, who whisper and mutter, should not a people inquire of their God? Why consult the dead on behalf of the living? To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according to this word, they have no light
of dawn [emphasis supplied]. Isaiah 8:19–20, NIV.
“The law and the testimony” is another way of referring to the five
books of Moses and to the prophets. Bit by bit, the canon of the Old
Testament was developing. Each book was tested. Does it measure up to
the rule? “They made their hearts as hard as flint and would not listen
to the law or to the words that the Lord Almighty had sent by his
Spirit through the earlier prophets [emphases supplied].” Zechariah
7:12, NIV. Eventually the New Testament was measured by the same
canons and the same rules.
Note the books that are in these three canons. The Law includes
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. The Prophets
include Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea,
Joel, Amos, and all the twelve so-called Minor Prophets up to Malachi.
And then The Writings, or The Psalms, include the Psalms, Proverbs,
Job, Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel,
Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles. Yes, to our surprise, Daniel was included by the Jews in The Writings rather than The Prophets.
You add to these thirty-nine the twenty-seven in the New
Testament canon and you have the sixty-six books of the Protestant
Bible. But these are not the only books that have ever claimed to be biblical. There may be more such books outside the Bible than inside it.
Many of them were written during the time between the Testaments,
and some bear a striking resemblance to the books that are in the biblical
canons. About a dozen of them were taken so seriously by the Jews outside of Palestine, that they found their place in the Greek Old
Testament. The Septuagint (as the Greek Old Testament was called),
became the Bible most widely used by early Christians. And that’s how
those extra books (called the Apocrypha) found a fixed place in the Latin
Bible and in Roman Catholic Bibles today. The Old Testament
Apocryphal books are: I and II Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Additions to
Esther (usually woven into biblical Esther), Wisdom of Solomon,
Ecclesiasticus (different from Ecclesiastes), Baruch, Susanna, Song of the
Three Children, Bel and the Dragon (these last three are often included
in Catholic versions of Daniel), Prayer of Manasseh, and I and II
Maccabees.
Although these books are found in Catholic Bibles, the ancient
Jews did not recognize them as inspired Scripture. They called them
“hidden,” suggesting they were not genuine. And many Christians have
agreed with the Jews, including many Catholic theologians and biblical
scholars. Even the church father Jerome did not want to include them in
his revision of the Latin Bible (the Vulgate). But the people were so accustomed to them, they insisted they be left there. When Luther gathered
them in the middle and took the position on them that he did, the
Catholic Church felt that it had to respond. So at the Council of Trent
in 1546, the books of the Apocrypha were pronounced sacred and canonical. That’s why they are in such Catholic Bibles as the Jerusalem and
the New American.
How should we decide which books belong and which books do
not? I think it helps a great deal to know that there were many other
“hidden” books whose sources were unknown and whose teaching was
even more questionable. The collection of these is called the Old
Testament “Pseudepigrapha,” which is based on the Greek words for
“falsely inscribed.” These books were not only rejected as Scripture by
the early Christians but also by our Roman Catholic friends to this day.
Some of the best known of these are the Testament of Adam, the Book
of Jubilees, Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, Testament of Job, the
Book of Enoch, the Sibylline Oracles, the Assumption of Moses, the
Ascension of Isaiah, the Psalms of Solomon, the Apocalypse of
Zephaniah, and the Story of Ahikar.
One can go even further. There is a whole collection of books called
the New Testament Apocrypha. These include books like the Gospel of
Thomas, the Gospel of Truth, the Acts of John, the Acts of Paul, the
Acts of Paul and Thecla, the Acts of Peter, the Acts of Barnabas, the
Apocalypse of Peter, the Apocalypse of Paul, the Epistle to the
Laodiceans, 3 Corinthians, and so forth. These books were written in
the early centuries of the church and expand on the life and teachings of
Jesus and the apostles.
How should one decide which books belong and which books do
not? I think it helps a great deal to know the origin of these books. The
opinion of centuries of believers, who were much closer to the writing
of these books than we are, is of consequence. But nothing compares
with reading them all. I have done it several times. It takes a long weekend without any interruption. I read all the way through the Old
Testament and then the Old Testament Apocrypha and the Old
Testament Pseudepigrapha and the New Testament, and the New
Testament Apocrypha. And when you arrive at the Revelation of Peter,
you haven’t forgotten Maccabees and Enoch and Romans and Genesis.
They are still in your mind. Based on that experience, I think the sixtysix books of the Protestant Bible are in a class all by themselves.
There are some Apocryphal books that seem more acceptable than
others. But as you go into even the book of Maccabees, it teaches that
“it’s a good thing to pray for the dead, that they may be relieved of their
sins (2 Maccabees 12:43–45).” If it’s true that our prayers to God can
change the status of somebody who died a rebel, it would cancel out
much of what the Bible says about God. “The giving of alms atones for
sin (Sirach 3:30).” Do you see what model of sin that implies? There are
many hard to believe stories in the New Testament Apocrypha: stories
of magic and mystery. How Peter made a camel go through the eye of a
needle. The story of John and the bedbugs. The story of how Peter
prayed that Simon Magus would fall down over the city of Rome. And
when it happened, Simon broke his leg in three places. You should see
these stories. But when you read them all together, I agree with Catholic
Jerome, Protestant Luther and the great Bible Societies, that the sixtysix are the only ones that really measure up.
Do We Have the Right Words?
That brings us to the question, “Do we have the right words?”
That’s a huge subject. There are people who devote all their lives to this
question. First of all, I am sure you are aware that the Bible was not
written in English, but in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. Not only that,
ancient written Hebrew provided only the consonants. Although they
were not written out, the vowels were understood by the original readers. Scholars have worked ever since to provide the appropriate vowels
to the Hebrew words of the Bible. The Greek, on the other hand, was
all in capital letters and there was no separation between the words.
Can you imagine reading that? For example, how would you read the
phrase: GODISNOWHERE. Are you going to read it as an atheist
might? “God is nowhere.” Or are you going to say as a believer might?
“God is now here.” No wonder the saints have argued and accused each
other over the meaning of the Bible. But it’s often much more innocent
than that. How easily one could make a mistake.
All the original copies of the Bible have disappeared. There are
thousands of hand-written copies, though, that have come down to us
through the years. And no two of them are the same, which could distress a person who doesn’t know better. But there is a bright side to this.
When you look at thousands of these manuscripts, and note what the differences are like, you would be moved to say that no other ancient document has been preserved with such care and accuracy as the books of the
Bible. Let me quote the one-time curator of the British Museum, who
spent a lifetime studying such matters, “You can pick the Bible up with
confidence and say, for all practical purposes, we have the word of God.”
Can We Trust the Translations?
But what about all the translations? There are about two thousand
languages on earth, and there are at least parts of the Bible in almost
every one of those languages. And hundreds of translations in English!
The story behind each of them is long and colorful. Beginning in 1382,
the “Morning Star of the Reformation,” Wycliffe, directed the translation of a magnificent Bible, all written out by hand. In 1525 along came
Tyndale, who provided the first printed English New Testament.
Ninety percent of Tyndale’s work is in our King James Version. In his
Bible he was inclined to include some notes that were rather inflammatory, such as opposite the story of the golden calf: “Yea, but the Pope’s
bull slayeth more than Aaron’s calf.” This was hardly designed to win
him friends and it may have cost him his life. Tyndale was arrested,
strangled, and burned to death at the stake for daring to translate the
Bible into such readable English.
• • • • •
In Tyndale’s day they burned the translator. In modern
times, they burn the translation.
• • • • •
In 1599 the great Geneva Bible was produced by the Calvinists
who fled from England to the Continent. It is also called the “Breeches
Bible,” because it says that “Adam and Eve took fig leaves and sewed
unto themselves breeches.” And then in 1611 came the great King James
Version. It was published with no notes, because the notes in preceding
Bibles had stirred up so much trouble. And then there are all the revisions of the King James: The English Revised, The American Revised, The
Revised Standard, The New American Standard Bible, and even The New
King James Version.
Around the beginning of the Twentieth Century, the modern
speech Bibles began to appear. I think of Moffatt’s great work, and
Weymouth’s, and Goodspeed. The Goodspeed New Testament is still one
of the very best, finished in 1923. But some were opposed to using modern speech in Bibles. In fact, some have even thought that the King
James was too vulgar. A Boston man named Dickinson (in 1833), for that
reason, redid the King James Version. For example, when Elizabeth and
Mary met together during their pregnancies, it says in the King James,
“the babe leapt in her [Elizabeth’s] womb” (Luke 1:41). And Mr.
Dickinson thought that was very crude. So in his Bible he changed it to,
“the embryo was joyfully agitated.” The whole Bible reads like that, all
the way through.
And then there are versions that were produced by women: Mrs.
Montgomery in 1925 and Helen Spurrell in 1885. There have also been
many magnificent Roman Catholic translations—the Knox, the Kleist
and Lilly, the Jerusalem, the New American, the Spencer, the
Alberhouse, and the Rheims-Douay, the one that started it all. There are
also great Jewish translations. I recall the quality translation of Genesis
2:7 in one of them: “God breathed into man the breath of life and man
became a living being.” A footnote to that excellent translation says that
the Hebrew word for “soul” means “the whole person, even the blood in
his veins.”
There are also joint Protestant–Catholic Bibles, for example, the
Revised Standard Version–RC (Roman Catholic.) There is even a joint
Protestant, Catholic and Jewish Bible — the biggest one ever to come out
— The Anchor Bible. In addition to these, there are translations that are
especially helpful for study, The New Testament from Twenty-six
Translations, for example. There are also smaller collections of translations, some with four columns and some with two.
Some translations are extremely readable, like Phillips. I think his
work is so magnificent. Then there is the Good News Bible, or Today’s
English Version, by the American Bible Society. The New English Bible
was England’s desperate attempt to save the British Isles for
Christianity. That explains why they made that one so different and so
readable.
And then there are the paraphrases, like The Living Bible. It is very
rewarding to read, even though its author said it is only a paraphrase.
Included in this category of paraphrases are the Cotton Patch New
Testament, Letters to the Saints in Atlanta, Georgia, and God Is For
Real, Man. The last one is the ultimate limit, trying to make the Bible
readable to the gangs that roamed the streets of New York at that time.
Would you support a translator who would do that? The 23rd Psalm in
that translation turns out to be, “The Lord is my probation officer,”
because the intended readers had never seen sheep or a shepherd on the
streets of New York. I have unlimited respect for the people who have
been willing to do all this work. It takes a lifetime to produce some of
these translations. I even have room for the Reader’s Digest Bible, though
it leaves out some of my favorite sections. It is only meant to be an appetizer.
The Bible has never been so available, and has never been so readable. Fear of versions has been lessening. People aren’t burning new
translations, the way someone did when the Revised Standard Version
first appeared. The address of that public burning was appropriately
Furnace Street, Akron, Ohio. The right attitude towards versions, I
think, is in the original Preface to the King James Bible. I wish it were
still there. You see, nobody wanted the King James when it first came
out. It wasn’t just the size, people were upset that the words were
changed. So the men who prepared this great Bible say in the introduction, “Hath the Kingdom of God become words and syllables? Why
should we be in bondage to them when we may be free?”
“In many and various ways” (Hebrews 1:1–3) God has spoken to us
through the years. And in many and various ways those words have
been translated into English and most of the other languages on this
earth. How else could the gospel go to all the world? How could people
find out about our God? So there is no substitute for taking the Bible (in
the versions of your choice) and sitting down together to read and study.
Never has the evidence contained in the Bible been so readily available.
And having all this evidence so readily available, let’s read it. Can we
confidently come to the conclusion that we understand the meaning?
That the evidence is really there? That the Bible can be trusted? And,
as some of us who have spent a lot of time reading these versions believe;
the Author who is behind the Bible can be trusted because there is trustworthy evidence in the record.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: No one has wanted to burn a new version in quite
some time, as far as I know. Although I do know someone who wanted
to burn the Reader’s Digest Bible.
Graham Maxwell: Well, that’s an improvement, in any case. In
Tyndale’s day they burned the translator. In modern times, they burn
the translation. Now they cremate people with words as they talk about
them in the press.
Lou: In a way Graham, I can understand the frustration of a person
who says, “Wouldn’t it be better to get rid of all these versions? It’s so
confusing. Why are there so many?” I go down to the religious book
store and I say, “I would like to buy a Bible.” But it’s not that simple
any more. The sales person responds, “Well now, what version do you
want?” How do you respond to the confusion that is created by all these
versions?
Graham: It’s a pity that such a blessing is perceived as confusion.
I think a lot depends on how much one knows about the source of the
Bible. If it had been written originally in our own language, maybe one
version would be enough. But when you look at the Greek and the
Hebrew and the Aramaic, you realize that the same phrase can be translated in different ways. Like, “Be ye therefore perfect,” in Matthew 5:48.
Now is that a command, or is it a promise? You cannot tell from the
Greek. It is very difficult to bring that ambiguity over into English. This
is where Goodspeed shows himself such a master. His English translation
of Matthew 5:48 is, “You are to be perfect.” That can be read as either a
command or a promise. But most versions would say it either one way or
the other. So in view of the difficulty of bringing ambiguity over into
English, I don’t want to limit myself to a single version that would give
me only one possibility. I want to have all the possibilities that are available.
Lou: I noticed you spoke of Goodspeed, I’ve sometimes thought
that was your favorite. But then I’ve heard you say, “Well, today this one
is my favorite, but tomorrow it may not be.” Of all these translations,
which one is the most trustworthy and reliable?
• • • • •
In view of the difficulty of bringing ambiguity over into
English, I don’t want to limit myself to a single Bible version, I want to have all the possibilities that are available.
• • • • •
Graham: It’s simply incredible that the Goodspeed translation has
held up so well over the decades. By the way, Goodspeed did the New
Testament and he did the Apocrypha. He did not do the Old. In the
“Chicago Bible,” a group of others under Dr. Smith did the Old. That’s
why it’s sometimes called the Smith-Goodspeed Bible. Which is my
favorite? Which is the best? It all depends on what you use it for. When
I get home at night, if I want to put my feet up and read something
inspiring, it’s still difficult to beat Phillips. Absolutely marvelous! But if
I am doing serious preparation for teaching, I’ll have the original out in
front of me but also several versions. One of them would be the Revised
Standard Version. Though it was burned in 1952, it has proven to be one
of the most precise, conservative, and safe English translations ever.
Lou: Do you think that a group translation, a committee translation,
is a little more reliable than one by an individual?
Graham: That’s a very useful question. Group translations may be
a little more dull. For example, when the Revised Standard Version was
being prepared, they always had to have a two-thirds vote before they
would arrive at a decision. Often, Goodspeed was on the committee and
so was Moffatt. Sometimes they would disagree with the two-thirds
vote. So when it was all over, Goodspeed wrote a book, Problems of New
Testament Translation, to list the one hundred or so places where he
was voted down. And it’s very exciting reading. So if the translator is
an individual, there is a little more freedom. And in spots an individual
translation may even be more correct, because the group had to arrive at
a compromise in order to get the two-thirds vote. You know, textbooks
written by committees aren’t as exciting as books written by an individual.
Lou: Maybe we all need to learn Hebrew and Greek. Is that the
best answer to the translation problem; to read it in the original for ourselves?
Graham: I like to say to medical, dental and nursing students that
I hope they won’t spend as much time studying Hebrew and Aramaic
and Greek as I have. We live in an age of specialization. When I have a
pain somewhere, I don’t want their expertise in the biblical languages. I
want their help for my specific problem. So let them study their specialty
and let me study mine. I’ll go to them when I need their help, and
they’re welcome to phone me when they need my help on the biblical
languages. Thanks to the existence of these wonderful translations, however, it isn’t necessary for most people to study the languages. But there
ought to be somebody in the community whom you could phone when
a technical problem arises.
Lou: You are saying, then, that the multiplicity of versions is a real
strength.
Graham: That’s where the safety is. I wouldn’t want just one
translation. Sometimes I have almost my whole collection of 150 out on
the floor.
Lou: I have heard the question raised: Isn’t it true that the translator’s theological positions are often reflected in their translations? For
example, aren’t the Ten Commandments translated differently in the
Roman Catholic Bible? Aren’t they numbered differently? Don’t they
read differently?
Graham: On the contrary, Catholic translations are very precise.
Some of the best translations are of Roman Catholic origin, although
they don’t always use the most understandable English. Nevertheless,
over time, Catholic translations have become clearer and clearer. They
are frankly some of the very best. The Jerusalem Bible is very readable.
So is the New American Bible.
To show you how candid and dependable the Catholic versions are,
let me refer to the Kleist and Lilly translation. In Romans 6:3–6, where
there is a reference to being buried in baptism, there is a footnote by
these two Jesuit scholars at the bottom. “Paul is obviously alluding here
to the early Christian custom of baptism by immersion. The descent into
the water is suggestive of descent into the grave. The ascent from the
water is suggestive of resurrection to newness of life.” I can’t think of a
better note than that.
Coming back to your original question, the Ten Commandments
read exactly the same in Catholic Bibles. They do count them differently,
as you know. The Sabbath commandment is number three. So if you
were to ask a Catholic regarding the Church’s position on the fourth
commandment, you’d be surprised by the response. But they are not the
only ones. Luther and some others have counted the Sabbath as number
three and split the tenth commandment into two; nine and ten. But that
doesn’t affect the message of the biblical text.
Lou: Graham, you referred earlier to paraphrases and to The Living
Bible. There has been considerable controversy over them. Is a paraphrase a real Bible? Are they trustworthy?
• • • • •
I like to relax when I’m in someone else’s home and say,
“Which Bible do you have there? Let’s use yours.”
• • • • •
Graham: Well, in the first place, there is no way to translate without paraphrasing. So there is some paraphrasing in every single translation, unless the translator goes word for word literal, as in a
Greek/English transliteration, for example. But such translations tend to
be quite lame with the words out of proper English order. Have you ever
tried to translate French into English word for word? It doesn’t make
much sense. So all translations are somewhat paraphrased. That means a
re-phrasing of the original text.
Are paraphrases trustworthy? It depends on how far you go. The
author of The Living Bible, for example (Kenneth Taylor), departed a long
way from the original text. In fact, sometimes he expanded a sentence
into a whole paragraph! There’s no way you could reproduce the original
languages from The Living Bible. You almost could with Goodspeed.
That’s what is so amazing. Goodspeed wrote in a readable American
idiom, but without multiplying words. On the other hand, with Taylor’s
paraphrases (The Living Bible), when he’s right, he’s clearly and brilliantly right. And when he’s wrong, in my opinion, he’s very clearly wrong.
The best thing about it is — he’s clear.
Lou: But sometimes clearly wrong.
Graham: Well, let me show you a time he gets it right, and I’ll skip
the wrong one. Psalm 120:1, KJV: “I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills
from whence cometh my help.” That’s beautiful. It’s like being in Loma
Linda, and looking across the valley to the snow-covered mountains.
Very inspiring. But in the Bible, the Psalmist was referring to the fertility cults at the top of the hill. According to Hosea, the leaders of Israel
went up into those mountains to sacrifice with the cult prostitutes
(Hosea 4:13–14). They were going up to those groves and engaging in
immorality. And so the 120th Psalm actually says in the Hebrew: “Shall
I lift up mine eyes unto the hills? Never. My help comes from the Lord”
(Psalm 120:1–2). So Dr. Taylor paraphrases: “Shall I look to the mountain
gods for help? Never. I will look to the God who created the mountains.”
I say he is brilliantly right on this text, though it is a rather free paraphrase. I wouldn’t be afraid to use The Living Bible, but in the interests
of precision, I would want to have some of these others alongside.
Lou: When I go to a religious bookstore and ask for a Bible, I notice
Bibles that are advertised as helping me with a lot of explanatory notes.
What about that kind of thing? Can that be useful?
Graham: Some are helpful and some are not. The notes certainly
aren’t inspired. The headings aren’t either. That’s true even when the
heading in the Song of Solomon says, “Christ’s Love for the Church.”
That’s an old tradition, but it’s not inspired. For another example,
there’s an extraordinary note in one printing of The Matthew’s Bible
(around 1549) to Peter’s comment that wives should obey their husbands
in all things (1 Peter 3:1). In the margin of this Bible, which has lots of
helpful notes, it says, “Yet it is the duty of the husband to beat the fear
of the Lord into his wife, that she may learn to obey.” Comments like
this leave me in favor of having the text pure and unadulterated, so I can
make up my own mind. There are also many Bibles with helpful margins,
so long as you realize they do not come with the same inspiration, and
you read them carefully.
Lou: Does your church, the Seventh-day Adventist church, have
an official version?
Graham: I think some have rather wished so. But it speaks well of
our worldwide outlook that we don’t limit ourselves to an official version. We wish to share the picture of God with every person under heaven, in all the languages of earth. So how can we have one official transla-
tion? There’s only one thing that could be official, and that’s the original:
The Hebrew, the Aramaic, and the Greek, from which all translations
ultimately come. But we’re prepared to go to the world using any version, any translation. And that’s why I like to relax when I’m in someone else’s home and say, “Which Bible do you have there? Let’s use
yours.”
Lou: That leads to another question. If I heard you rightly, we do
not have any of the original words that the prophet Isaiah wrote, for
example. We have copies of an earlier copy. And in these manuscripts
there are a number of variations. In other words, a particular manuscript
may add a word, leave one out, or use a completely different word. Are
there any Christian beliefs, such as the picture of God, that are affected
by these variations?
Graham: It’s very interesting to look through all of them and see
how relatively few issues there are and then look at some of the most colorful ones. Since you mentioned it, let me pick an illustration that affects
the number one Christian belief, the picture of God. John 5:3–4, in the
King James Bible, describes a large crowd of sick people gathered at the
pool of Bethesda. It had five porches, and every once in a while the water
would move. Now what caused the water to move?
The way the story is told in the KJV, God would look out over the
parapets of heaven, see the crowd there, call over His angels and say,
“It’s worth going down again. Go down and stir up the water. And
remember, first one in is healed.” And this went on for years and years
and years. Can you imagine an angel saying to God, “God, we’ve been
watching a man there struggling for thirty-three years to get in, and we
angels are so sorry for him; could we bend the rule this once and heal
him? Because there’s no way he’s going to get in.” And God says, “You
know I never change. First one in is healed.”
I never did like that story. And I was so relieved to start learning
Greek in 1938 and discover that the idea that an angel stirred the water
is a legend that crept in later on. The older manuscripts simply say, “the
water moved,” without any explanation. Superstitious readers probably
assumed that an angel did it. More likely, it was drainage from the temple
area, a spring, or an intermittent underground stream. In any case, that
legend eventually crept into the text.
Look in the early manuscripts and you have a magnificent story
there. The real truth was that on a Saturday afternoon God walked by.
And the paralyzed man looked up and saw the kindest face he had ever
seen. And the kind face said, “Would you like to be well?” And he said,
“I surely would.” And that kind face did not berate the man for squandering his health in youthful self-indulgence. He simply said, “Then pick
up your little mat and go home, and you will be well.” That’s the real
picture of God.
Lou: So the angel story actually appears in a manuscript?
Graham: Quite a few, but later on.
Lou: Does that mean our more recent versions, which have taken
manuscript study quite seriously, would be more reliable?
Graham: They tend to be based on the early manuscripts, which
we didn’t know about at the time the King James was translated. But
there isn’t a long list of these strange variations. I picked out a more colorful one. There are very few. And we could get along without every
one of them. One that might seem helpful is the Trinity text in 1 John
5:7–8 (KJV) that has no support at all in the Greek manuscripts. But I
never did think it was the best way to support the Trinity anyway. You
can do that from the Gospel of John and elsewhere much better. So we
don’t lose anything by going back and comparing all these hundreds and
thousands of manuscripts. By looking at the evidence as a whole, there
is less danger of distortion.
Lou: You mentioned the apocryphal books of the Old Testament,
and others related to the New Testament. I’m under the impression that
in the New Testament there are some quotations from the Old
Testament Apocrypha. What about that?
Graham: Well, there are some interesting similarities. Whether
they’re quotations or not is debatable. In Jude it mentions that Michael
the Archangel was going down to resurrect Moses, and he and Satan
argued about it (Jude 1:9). That story is told in some detail in The
Assumption of Moses, which is a pseudepigraphical book from the time
between the testaments. Of course, if the story were true, then the two
accounts could be based on a common source. A second similarity would
be the reference, also in Jude, where it says, “Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, predicted the Lord would come with ten thousand of His saints”
(based on Jude 1:14). That is in the pseudepigraphical book of Enoch. Of
course, if Enoch said that stunning thing before the Flood, the “Lord is
coming with ten thousand of His saints,” that would have been told over
many a back fence. And eventually those memorable words found their
place in both the apocryphal books and also in the book of Jude.
Lou: So you are saying that if something is in the Apocrypha, that
does not make it automatically wrong.
Graham: Right! There is a long list of things in the Apocrypha
which are quite evidently true. John was cast into a cauldron of boiling
oil and survived, Peter was crucified upside down, and Isaiah was sawed
in half in a hollow log. The latter is from The Martyrdom of Isaiah.
Newspapers have some truth in them too, from time to time.
Lou: I was interested that you have read all the ancient books related to the Bible and you see a distinction between the sixty-six books in
the biblical canon and all of these pseudepigraphical and apocryphal
books.
Graham: An interesting example is the apocryphal story of Jesus
playing with one of His friends. The boy either threw a stone, as one
manuscript says, or he bumped Jesus, according to another, and Jesus in
anger turned to curse His playmate and the playmate died. And the parents of the dead boy came to Joseph and Mary and said, “Please, remove
yourselves from this community. We do not want this violent child living among us.” They were talking about Jesus! I could tell you dozens
more stories like that from the New Testament Apocrypha.
Lou: Here’s another question, shifting gears a bit. “You spoke
about sanctification. What is this? If we sincerely accept Jesus as our
Savior, how can we ever be lost? Once we are saved, aren’t we always
saved?”
Graham: The question is based on a rather legal understanding of
what went wrong. But if what went wrong is that God’s creatures began
to distrust, became rebellious and left God, as it were, we not only need
to be set right, but we want to be kept right. We want to be kept in that
relationship of love and trust and admiration and willingness to listen.
But I could be set right and kept right for a while, and still be free to
leave. And that’s how I understand what Paul said, when he wrote, “I
discipline myself very closely, lest having preached to others, I myself
should be disqualified” (1 Corinthians 9:27). The very essence of the
truth about God is that He values nothing higher than our freedom. It
tells me that a million years down the line, I’ll still be free to go.
Lou: An eleven year old wrote in, “Why are there so many views
of who God is?” Could you cover all that in about thirty seconds?
Graham: There are so many views of God. You couldn’t list them
in thirty seconds. I think they arise from many different sources. One is
from reading the Bible selectively, here a little and there a little, rather
than taking it as a whole. Another reason is that we might bring our
view of God into our reading of the text. And there is also the influence
of the adversary behind the scenes. But I think among people who really
want to know God, the greatest source of diversity is that we each have
our favorite texts about God. I have my text. You have your text. If we
take the Bible as a whole, however, there is a greater possibility that we
might come into the kind of unity that Paul talks about in Ephesians
(Ephesians 4:13, KJV), a “unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the
Son of God.” And that’s our goal in this book.
Which brings me to the topic of the next chapter. “If we have a reliable record of the evidence, can we be confident that we correctly understand the meaning?” That topic is looking more and more important as
we carry on these conversations about God.
