Chapter Fourteen
God Can Completely Heal the Damage
Done
In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ uttered those memorable words
that have troubled saints and sinners alike ever since. “Be ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.” Matthew
5:48, KJV. Whether we find those words encouraging or discouraging
depends, as with so many of our beliefs, upon the kind of person we
believe our God to be. It also depends on our understanding of what He
wants for His children throughout the universe. This is especially true
for those of us who live on this planet, who have been caught up in the
damaging consequences of the Great Controversy.
The topic of this chapter is the Christian doctrine of perfection, but
in the larger setting of the conflict in God’s family. Rightly understood,
perfection can be good news and speak very well of our heavenly Father.
But misunderstood, it can put God in a very bad light — it can make Him
appear to be arbitrary, exacting, and severe.
As we’ve considered before, all God wants in His family is peace
and freedom. But to have peace and freedom there must be mutual love
and trust, maturity and self-control. Things like this cannot be commanded, or produced by force or fear. Instead, God offers to set right and keep
right everything that has gone wrong. That means He is willing to completely heal the damage that sin has done.
Jesus the Healer
When Jesus was here to demonstrate the truth about His Father
and the plan of salvation, He spent most of His time healing rather than
preaching. While there is influence and value in preaching, healing eloquently illustrates the truth about God and His government and what it
would mean to set right everything that has gone wrong. Jesus certainly
didn’t practice the healing arts to attract crowds of people to His meetings. Whenever He found that people were coming for the wrong reason,
He said something that caused most of them to go home (see John 6 as a
whole, for example).
When Jesus healed the paralytic at the pool (John 5:1–15), He was
preaching in action rather than in words. The healing was a demonstration of the truth about God. Forbid the thought, but imagine that you
had terminal lung cancer as the result of a lifetime of smoking. You’re sitting anxiously in the office of your physician. What is the best news you
could possibly hear at that moment? Would it be for the physician to say,
“I forgive you for smoking”? Forgiveness wouldn’t heal the damage
done by smoking, you would still die. The only difference is that you
would die forgiven. And forgiveness would only help, in this instance,
if your physician were accustomed to killing all the patients who contracted lung cancer because of a lifetime of smoking. It would be a relief
to hear such a physician say, “I forgive you.” Now you won’t be killed
after all. But physicians do not kill their patients. Neither does God.
What if the physician should say instead, “I have very good news
for you. I can make you completely well, if you’ll cooperate”?
“Do you mean that, although I have spent a lifetime smoking, and
this is really my own fault, you can make me perfectly healthy again?”
“Yes, I can.”
“Well actually, Doctor, all I really want is to be forgiven.”
Would you say anything so absurd? Yet so often we seem to say that
to God. Wouldn’t you rather say, “Doctor, if that is true, how can I
cooperate? What do you want me to do?”
The doctor might respond, “Well this will require some changes.
But if you trust me enough to follow my instructions, I can absolutely
guarantee that you will be perfectly restored.”
Would you say, “One moment, Doctor. I don’t want to have to do
anything, I was counting on you to do it all. I am expecting you to put
your hand on my chest and heal me by a miracle. If I have to work to get
well, then I am going to look for another physician.” Would you do that?
Or would you say, “Doctor, do you mean that if I trust you enough to
cooperate with you and follow the instructions you give me, you can
guarantee to make me well? Then, please tell me what I have to do.”
Wouldn’t you eagerly ask, like the jailor during the earthquake at
Philippi, “What must I do to be saved (Greek: sôzô)? What must I do to
be well (same Greek word — based on Acts 16:30)?”
As Christians we need more than mere physical healing. We have
been damaged in many other ways. The most serious damage has been
done to our ability to live in love, peace and freedom, to be able to trust
and be trustworthy. In other words, we are no longer the kind of people
God could really trust with all the privileges of eternal life.
The Biblical Meaning of Salvation
As we considered last time, we have all sinned and we continue to
come short of God’s glorious ideal (based on Romans 3:23). You recall
that sin is rebelliousness and disorderliness. Sin is cheating on our relationships. Sin is knowing what’s right to do and not doing it. Sin is a
breakdown of trust. We have so damaged ourselves that, left alone, we
would die. Would it be enough for God to say, “I forgive you”? Would
forgiveness alone heal the damage done? Or would we still die?
If you believe that eternal torture is the penalty for sinning, then
forgiveness would be your primary concern, so God won’t have to torture you after all. Just think how that cruel teaching about eternal torture has cast its hellish shadow over the picture of God and the plan of
salvation.
If you are afraid of God, then it is wonderful to hear Him say, “I forgive you.” And He has said that, hasn’t He? Many times. But heaven is
not going to be filled with pardoned criminals. It wouldn’t be safe.
Heaven will be filled with healed, changed, trustworthy saints. God proposes to set right everything that has gone wrong, to completely heal the
damage done by rebellion and distrust.
It is most significant to know that the word “salvation” means,
essentially, healing. To be saved is to be healed. In a more legal understanding of the plan of salvation, to be saved is more to be forgiven. It is
like having your fire insurance paid up, so you can be admitted to eternity. In the trust/healing model, on the other hand, salvation means healing the damage done. This is made plain in many places in Scripture.
Let’s use Luke 18:42 as an example. In the King James Version,
Jesus said to the blind man: “Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved
thee.” But in the New International Version it reads: “Receive your
sight; your faith has healed you.” The Greek word is exactly the same,
sôzô. This word is sometimes translated “I save” and sometimes “I heal.”
This double meaning of sôzô can be found multiple times in the New
Testament (Luke 7:50; 8:48, 50; 17:19; see also Acts 16:30, referenced
above). Luke’s wording is powerful evidence for the trust/healing model
of salvation. But there is much more.
Matthew 5:48: Command or Promise?
There is an issue in the translation of Matthew 5:48 (“Be ye therefore perfect,” KJV) that we need to look at. The original language here is
not entirely clear. Is it a promise or is it a command? Does it read “you
must be perfect,” or “you will be perfect”? The key word (Greek: eses-
the) is in the future tense. It literally means, “You will be perfect.” You
can’t tell from that if it is a promise or a command. It can be simply a
future statement: “You will be perfect.” Or it can be a command, as
when a sergeant puts up a sign saying, “There will be no smoking in the
barracks.” That use of the future is the equivalent of a command.
Notice how other versions have rendered Matthew 5:48. First of
all, from the Good News Bible: “You must be perfect.” Second, from the
American Standard Version: “Ye therefore shall be perfect.” They each
expressed their choice as strongly as possible. On the other hand,
Goodspeed, ever the skillful translator, brought into English both meanings of the Greek (and others, like the NASB, have followed his example): “You are to be perfect.” Which is it, a promise or a command? Some
of you are familiar with the words in Desire of Ages, “This command is
a promise” (page 311). What insight that shows into the meaning of the
verse! Now if it is a command, it could be terrifying. We have to be perfect or else! It would certainly be terrifying if we didn’t know the One
who has asked us to be perfect. But that is the subject of all sixty-six
books of the Bible and the subject of the earlier chapters of this book.
Scripture as a whole reassures us about the One who said we must be,
or will be, perfect.
We find a beautiful picture of God in the cases of David and
Solomon, as described in 1 Kings 9:4–5 and 11:4–6. God spoke to
Solomon: “If you walk before me, as David your father walked, with
integrity of heart and uprightness. . . . I will establish your royal throne.”
1 Kings 9:4–5, RSV. Do you remember David’s life and all the awful
things he did? Yet here we have God describing David. “He walked
before Me with integrity of heart and uprightness.” Then it tells us,
“When Solomon was old his wives turned away his heart after other
gods. And his heart was not wholly true to the Lord his God, as was the
heart of David his father.” 1 Kings 11:4, RSV. “Solomon did what was
evil in the sight of the Lord, and did not wholly follow the Lord, as
David his father had done.” 1 Kings 11:6, RSV. David did some terrible
things, but evidently his heart stayed “wholly true” to God throughout!
Can you imagine having to deal with David’s problems in a church
board meeting? Most boards would censure and even disfellowship him.
Yet through it all God could say that David walked before Him with
“integrity of heart.” What do you think of a God who would describe
David in that way?
What about Solomon? How were his sins different than David?
The Bible tells us that his heart went after other gods, some of them are
even listed in verses 5 and 7. He did what David never did. David never
left God to go after other gods. Solomon did. He even went after the
most disgusting of the gods, as some of the versions translate it. Yet at
the end of his life he came to his senses and God took him back. Did he
become a second-class member of the family from then on? Not at all!
God even said to Solomon, “Write Me another book for the Bible.” And
Solomon wrote Ecclesiastes after living such a life. According to 2 Peter,
what kind of people write books in the Bible? “Holy men of God spake
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.” 2 Peter 1:21, KJV. Holy people
wrote the Bible.
How could God describe Solomon as one of the holy men of God?
A man who devoted himself to abominable pagan gods? The lives of
Solomon and David do not speak too well of them, but what does this
passage tell us about our God? We like to cite the promise that He will
treat us as if we had never sinned. But these stories are not promises;
they are facts. They are evidence. God demonstrated in His treatment of
David and Solomon that He really will treat us as if we had always been
His loyal children. And there are many other examples like them in the
Bible. That is the kind of God who wants us to be perfect. Do we have
any need to be afraid of Him?
The Meaning of Perfection
What does it mean to be perfect? How perfect must one be in this
life? Suppose you saw someone who never swore, never gambled, never
smoked, never drank, never stole anything, never lost his temper, never
broke the Sabbath. Would you be looking at a perfect person? I hope not,
because you could be in an anatomy building, looking at a well-preserved
corpse. Corpses never do anything bad, but they never do anything good
either. They just never do anything, which is a rather popular view of
perfection.
In the early days of the church, the number one exponent of that
view was a man by the name of Simeon, a member of the church in
Antioch. He so much wanted to overcome sin, that as soon as he could
afford it, he got material and built himself a small pillar. He climbed up
on top, but found it was not tall enough. So he got more material and
built on it until it was sixty feet high. He perched on top of that pillar
for 30 years until he died. Think of all the bad things you cannot do on
top of a sixty-foot pillar. So they called him Saint Simeon Stylites.
Other members of the church envied his perfect life, and as soon as
they could afford it, they built pillars all around the area. Pretty soon
most of the members were perched on pillars. So Simeon founded a
whole order in the church, known as the Order of the Stylites; the order
of the polesitters. Is that how the saints are going to be found when the
Lord comes, all perched on pillars? They are of no use to anybody, but
they never do anything wrong either. Is that the best definition of perfection? The absence of doing wrong?
• • • • •
Corpses never do anything bad, but they never do anything good either. They just never do anything, which is a
rather popular view of perfection.
• • • • •
There is a much more positive approach to perfection. It is to
understand that the very word in the Bible (Greek: teleiotês) means “completed” or full-grown. When referring to animals or human beings, it
means mature, or grown up physically. It is generally used in the New
Testament for spiritual maturity (1 Corinthians 2:6; 14:20; Ephesians
4:13; Hebrews 5:14). So to be perfect means to be mature. And one version, at least, has it that way in Matthew 5:48: “You must become spiritually mature, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” Norlie. You see, when
someone is converted, when they are won back to trust, and the procedure of healing begins, the change is so great that it is like being born all
over again. Jesus said this to Nicodemus: “I am telling you the truth: no
one can see the Kingdom of God unless he is born again.” John 3:3,
GNT. Do you remember Nicodemus’ response? He thought that was a
little too much to believe (John 3:4). That is how great the change is.
That’s why Paul interpreted baptism the way he did. Baptism by
immersion symbolizes the great change in a person’s life. “By our baptism we were buried with Him in death, in order that, just as Christ was
raised from the dead by the Father’s glorious power, we also should live
an entirely new life.” Romans 6:4, Weymouth. Baptism by immersion
represents this new life best. It is like washing the dishes. It doesn’t do
much good just to sprinkle them a little — though our children might try
that short cut sometimes. The word “baptize” means to dip, to immerse.
This is recognized by many scholars, including Roman Catholic
scholars. In a footnote to Romans 6:3–4 in the Roman Catholic New
Testament by Kleist and Lilly, you can read the following: “St. Paul
alludes to the manner in which baptism was ordinarily conferred in the
primitive Church, by immersion. The descent into the water is suggestive of the descent of the body into the grave, and the ascent is suggestive of the resurrection to a new life.” That is why many Christians still
symbolize the beginning of healing through baptism by immersion. At
the time of baptism, of course, Christians are just beginners. Paul and
Peter call them babes in the truth (Romans 2:20; 1 Corinthians 3:1; 1
Peter 2:2; Hebrews 5:13), and babies need a great deal of protection. Yet
even at that beginning stage, God treats them as if they had never sinned,
as if they had always been His loyal children.
Does that mean that since He is so generous, it is all right to remain
“babes in the truth”? Or does God want us to grow up into perfection
and maturity? We know from the biblical record that it disturbed Paul a
great deal when, even after a few months, he found that the Christian
converts were still babes in the truth (1 Corinthians 3:1–3). When a
child’s physical development is delayed, we become very worried, don’t
we? When a child’s mental development is delayed, we are even more
concerned. But when a Christian adult is spiritually immature, we say,
“Isn’t that precious? Isn’t that sweet? He still has the faith of a little
child.” But the most serious of all conditions is to be spiritually immature. Notice what the Bible says about this:
. . . though by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone
to teach you the elementary truth of God’s word all over again. You
need milk, not solid food! Anyone who lives on milk, being still an
infant, is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness. But
solid food is for the mature [Greek: teleiôs], who by constant use have
trained themselves to distinguish good from evil. Therefore let us leave
the elementary teachings about Christ and go on to maturity. . . .
Hebrews 5:12–6:1, NIV.
The author of Hebrews essentially urges new believers to “grow up.”
Compare that passage with Paul’s advice to the believers in Ephesus:
His gifts were made that Christians might. . . arrive at real
maturity [Greek: teleion]. . . We are not meant to remain as children,
at the mercy of every chance wind of teaching, and of the jockeying of
men who are expert in the crafty presentation of lies. But we are
meant to speak the truth in love, and to grow up [emphasis supplied]
every way into Christ. . . . Ephesians 4:12, 14–15, Phillips.
Paul says in Ephesians that the whole purpose of the church is to
help people grow up to perfection and maturity. The Bible explains why.
Daniel 12 (verse 10), the Book of Revelation (chapters 13 and 16), and the
warnings of Christ (Matthew 24:24–27) and of Paul (2 Thessalonians
2:8–12), tell us that we face a time of confusion and deception such as the
world has never seen. If we are still babes in the truth then, we will
never survive. And so God in mercy waits for us to grow up, and to be
as settled into the truth as Job was. This topic is so important for the
church that we will invest a whole chapter (Eighteen) on it, under the
title “God Waits for His Children to Grow Up.” This is even the reason
for His merciful delay of the Second Coming. You see, it is not an arbitrary requirement that we grow up. It is absolutely necessary if we’re
going to survive in the end times. We must not be satisfied to be babes
in the truth; but we must grow up and be able to distinguish between
right and wrong.
• • • • •
To really obey God’s commandments is to simply grow
up; to be a safe and pleasant person to live next door to.
• • • • •
There is another way of looking at perfection; we can look at it as
perfect obedience to God’s law. The perfect person is the one who is
perfectly obedient. That might sound arbitrary until one takes another
look at God’s law. You see, God’s law is no threat to our freedom. All
God asks of us is love. But what does it mean to love? “Love is patient
and kind; love is not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude. Love
does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful” (1
Corinthians 13:4–5, RSV). Isn’t that the description of a grown-up person? To really obey God’s commandments is to simply grow up; to be a
safe and pleasant person to live next door to.
You Become Like the God(s) You Worship
How does one grow up like this? How does one become perfect and
mature? It is very simple; we are saved, we are healed, by faith. And
faith, as we’ve discussed earlier, means trust. It means love. It means
admiration. And that means a willingness to listen. It is a law in this
orderly universe that we will inevitably become like the person we wor-
ship and admire. We know that from experience. We also see it corroborated and confirmed in Scripture:
Then with unveiled faces we can all behold as in a mirror, the
glory of the Lord. And we become changed into His likeness, from
glory to glory, through the Spirit of the Lord working in us. 2
Corinthians 3:18, Norlie.
This is how the Spirit works. He brings us the truth. He brings us the
picture of God. He brings us all the evidence of Scripture. We look at the
picture. We like what we see, and it changes us.
• • • • •
It is inevitable that we will become like the person we worship and admire. If we regard God as arbitrary, exacting,
vengeful, unforgiving, and severe, we too will become like
that.
• • • • •
The same principle works in the other direction as well: “Those
who make them [idols] will be like them, and so will all who trust in
them.” Psalm 115:8, NIV. It is inevitable that we will become like the
person or the object we worship and admire. If we regard God as arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe, we too will become
like that. History has borne out the truth of that, hasn’t it? Think of so
many who have claimed to worship God, but having the Devil’s picture
of God, have been incredibly cruel in their treatment of other people,
even as Paul was before the Damascus road.
On the other hand, we can look at God as He really is, as His Son
proved Him to be, and as He is portrayed in the Scriptures. If we like and
admire what we see there, if we worship the One we see there, then it
is a law that we will become like Him. How absolutely essential, then,
that we have a true picture of our God. The hazard of a false picture, if
we prefer it, is that we will become like that. The trouble with this matter of perfection is that we tend to talk too much about perfection and
not nearly enough about God. We tend to be preoccupied with our performance rather than being preoccupied with the truth about God.
Paul admits this was his error before the Damascus road. But when
his picture of God changed, he became totally preoccupied with the
truth, with Jesus Christ, with why Jesus had to die, and what this said
about the Father. Look what it did to Paul from Damascus on, when he
shifted his attention from his own performance to the good news about
God. Look how he treated the problems in the city of Corinth with such
incredible grace and skill. When he was through, he wrote: “Be imitators
of me, as I am of Christ.” 1 Corinthians 11:1, RSV. Paul knew how it
works. It is a law that we become like the one we worship and admire.
How very sad it is that God’s offer of perfect healing should be
seen as a very forbidding and burdensome requirement. It is the cause of
much anxiety and fear, and sometimes even the subject of heated criticism and debate. As our Physician Father, God has offered to make us
completely well and to completely heal all the damage done. Our part is
not to heal ourselves. Our part is to cooperate. As Jesus said to the paralytic at the pool, “Would you like to be well? Would you like to be made
whole?” John 5:6. Perfection is not a command, it’s a generous offer.
How could we possibly turn such an offer down?
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: As you were talking about perfection, I heard an
emphasis on the generous gift of God, His eagerness to heal us and to
make us well. It makes one wonder, who would want to be imperfect or
continue to be ill when all this healing is available? Why do you think
there has been so much debate on this subject?
Graham Maxwell: Whole books have even been written about it.
I suppose there are many reasons. One is that people who claim to be
perfect can be quite insufferable. It has given perfection a bad name.
Another reason people might avoid the subject is that perfection
involves our behavior. And talking about behavior smacks of works, our
having to do something. Many people are so concerned to make salvation
by faith that they can’t fit this in.
Lou: How do you avoid the tendency to think in terms of your performance, to concentrate on how well or how poorly you’re doing?
Graham: I think your question goes back to things we’ve discussed
before. What is it that went wrong in the universe, and what would it
mean for God to set things right? If our problem is a legal one, our primary concern is to somehow set things right legally. In that case we
might be trying to please the Father and persuade Him not to punish or
destroy us. If my efforts toward perfection are in order to turn away His
wrath and improve my legal standing, then that’s salvation by works.
• • • • •
People who claim to be perfect can be quite insufferable. It
has given perfection a bad name.
• • • • •
In the case of the healing model, most of us have had a moment
when we’ve not been well and have had to go to the physician. And
we’ve heard the physician say, “Will you do the following?” And the
most logical thing in the world is to go home and do it. I don’t feel I’m
being a legalist to do that. It seems to me that if I really trust my doctor,
I will be willing to do what the doctor says. The only difference is my
work is in harmony with the Divine Physician. I’m not trying to please
the Doctor, nor am I trying to improve my legal standing with the
Doctor. I’m trying to do what is for my own best good. The gracious
Physician is saying, “Do the following. It will produce good results.”
And I go home and work hard to follow the regimen that He recommends.
Lou: So it really is a question of motivation that makes all the difference.
Graham: Your motivation and the model of salvation you are working with. The legal model of salvation has obscured the healing model,
and also perfection as complete healing.
Lou: The concern with perfection sometimes leads people to evaluate one another on how well they are doing.
Graham: That’s another thing that has given perfection a bad
name. It is the idea that “I have my own blueprint for perfection, and I’m
getting closer and closer to it. But I can tell you’re pretty far behind in
comparison!” Facing such an attitude can be quite discouraging. But who
is it that does not want us to understand the good news that God would
like to completely heal the damage done? The Devil has many versions of
perfection that are a corruption of the truth and are not good news. He
uses one thing to confuse one person, and another thing to confuse
another.
Lou: A lot of sincere discussion has centered around the question:
Does perfection mean that one never makes a mistake? We might think,
“If I could just be perfect, I wouldn’t make a mistake.”
Graham: This question recalls the time we discussed the meaning
of sin. Sin is not just making a mistake. Sin is rebelliousness. Sin is a stubborn unwillingness to listen. Sin is a breach of trust. Imagine in the hereafter I plant a pomegranate tree a little too close to the house, and it gets
bigger and bigger in the fertile soil there.
Then the Lord comes by and says, “Say, you planted it too close to
the house, didn’t you?”
And I’d say, “Yes, I did. Why didn’t You stop me?”
“It’s not a problem,” He’d say, “that’s how you learn. Pomegranate
trees grow rather large up here. Plant it a little farther away.”
So I would proceed to move it.
Lou: You are making a distinction between a sin and a mistake.
Graham: Yes. There’s no sin in making a mistake like that. Not
unless there is a spirit of rebelliousness within you, a stubborn unwillingness to accept advice, which would mean you’re not safe to have
around in eternity.
Lou: But can a perfect person sin? Not just make mistakes, but
actually sin?
Graham: What you are really asking is, can a perfect person ever
rebel? Look at Lucifer, the most perfect of all God’s creation. He was still
free and he exercised his freedom in rebellion. Think also of Adam and
Eve. They were perfect, and they rebelled. So though God heals all the
damage done by sin, He does not take away our freedom. We will still be
free in the hereafter.
Lou: You referred to Job. If I remember correctly, God called Job
a perfect person. And yet when you come to the end of the book of Job,
it says he repented in dust and ashes (Job 42:1–3). What did he have to
repent of? What does repentance mean when God has said to Satan,
“Have you considered My servant Job? A good and perfect man.” Job
1:8.
Graham: That’s right. In the hearing of the onlooking universe
God said, “Here is a perfect man.” And then the perfect man says, “I
repent.” I think we are more inclined to point out Job’s repentance than
God’s word that he is perfect. Under the pressure of bad advice from his
friends, Job finally said, “God, I’m sorry I have talked about things
beyond my understanding” (Job 42:1–3). And God immediately intervened and said, “Don’t give up, Job. You have done splendidly! You
have said of Me what is right. Don’t let these three theologians discourage you. In fact, pray for them. They need a lot of help to know Me the
way you do” (Job 42:7–8). We really need to take the book of Job as a
whole. God said Job was perfect.
Job in his humility said, “God, I have said a lot, and I’ve said it
with a great deal of feeling. If I seem the least bit irreverent, I repent.”
Then God could have said, “A man who is covered with boils and
has lost his whole family; I can understand why you cry the way you
have. You did not insult Me by this. You honored Me with your confidence.” We will explore this in more depth in the next chapter, “Talking
to God as a Friend.” Job is a marvelous example of how freely we can talk
to God, and still be reverent.
Lou: Let’s come back to this matter of perfection as “healing the
damage done.” Does that include restoration both physically and mentally? It reminds me of a question someone sent in: “Will you please tell me
why the people of the Old Testament lived longer than the people of our
day? What gave them a longer life span? Does food have anything to do
with our life span today?” I think that ties in with the topic of healing
all the damage that has been done by sin.
Graham: It does. I love to read about Methuselah and how long he
and his fellow patriarchs lived. Up until the Flood, they all lived a long
time unless they were murdered, or translated as Enoch was (based on
Genesis 4 and 5 — see especially Genesis 4:23 and 5:23–24). I remember
the first time I went through the sixty-six books of the Bible. I wrote in
my margin the declining ages of the patriarchs after the Flood. It’s precipitous! Their ages drop from almost a thousand down to a little over a
hundred. We have lost a great deal physically. We’re pygmies compared
with Adam and Eve. Fortunately, we’ve all sort of withered up together
so we look relatively respectable to each other, but if Adam and Eve
were to walk into the room, we’d be embarrassed, wouldn’t we?
We need both physical healing and mental healing. But in this life,
although we should do the best we can with the little that we have,
we’re all getting older. Not until the earth made new will all that be
restored. So some people say, “Well, if I can’t be physically and mentally
perfect in this life, I guess I can’t be perfect in any way.” No, spiritual
perfection, perfection of character, is held out to us. God could say of us,
as He did of Job, “I would trust you even through the last-day time of
trouble. I know you wouldn’t let Me down.” Perfection is not a brittle
thing. It is about being mature. It actually means just plain growing up.
It is unnatural not to grow up.
• • • • •
Perfection is not a brittle thing. It is about being mature.
It actually means just plain growing up. It is unnatural
not to grow up.
• • • • •
Lou: Does a person have to be perfect in any sense of the term in
order to be saved?
Graham: One can certainly be perfect in one’s willingness to listen. That willingness begins when one is converted, and to be converted
is simply to reverse one’s course. The unconverted person is stubbornly
unwilling to listen. The converted person is reverently and humbly willing to listen. One couldn’t do that if one didn’t have a new heart and a
right spirit (Ezekiel 36:26). It is the marvelous work of the Holy Spirit
that brings us to the conviction of truth (John 16:8–11), that leads me to
want to reverse my direction. And since it is the work of God, it is perfectly done; but I would only be a perfect baby at that stage. God
doesn’t need us to focus on our performance, but if I’m cheating in my
willingness to listen, there’s something seriously wrong.
Lou: I missed some words in this chapter that I’ve often heard associated with the subject of perfection. I didn’t hear you say that it is
“Christ’s righteousness imputed” or “the covering of Christ’s righteousness” that enables God to say, “You’re perfect.” Why didn’t you
use phrases like that?
Graham: We need to be familiar with such phrases and use them at
the right time. Actually those words belong to the legal model, which is
an emergency model. In the legal model the righteousness of Christ is
reckoned to us so that our account may look all right in the judgment.
And that’s often attributed to the verse: “Abraham believed God, and
it was reckoned (or imputed) to him as righteousness” (Romans 4:3,
RSV, alluding to Genesis 15:6). The Greek word there can actually
mean, “considered, recognized.”
In the trust/healing model, however, I would translate that verse:
“Abraham trusted God, and God said, ‘That’s good! That’s what I
want. If you trust Me, all is well.’” All God ever asked of us is trust.
And Abraham trusted Him enough to become His firmest friend
(Exodus 33:11; 2 Chronicles 20:7; Isaiah 41:8; James 2:23). Abraham really grew up, and while he remained reverent, he was not afraid of God.
Look at the relationship they had. That’s the ideal. And one does not
need to explain their relationship in legal terms at all.
It’s the same way with the term “covered.” The legal model suggests that if I were to stand in the presence of the Father as a sinner, He
would be very angry and destructive toward me if I were not covered.
So I am covered with something that keeps God from seeing the way I
really am. You can see how the legal model could have a comforting mes-
sage for people who are afraid of God. “Don’t worry. God can’t really
see you the way you are.” That’s emergency talk.
In reality, however, the Lord knows exactly the way I am. And the
Devil is reminding everyone of the way I am. But in the trust/ healing
model, God still treats me as if I had always been as loyal as His own Son.
He treats me as if I had lived as righteously as Christ. I know I haven’t
and so does He. But that’s how real and generous He is. And that’s a
clearer and more marvelous picture than the other. So we can use phrases
like “the covering of Christ’s righteousness” when people need them.
But whenever the audience is ready for it, we should also explain the
healing model. The legal language has its place, but it’s a station along
the way.
Lou: In the beginning of the chapter, you talked about it not being
enough just to be forgiven. But if I’m forgiven, if I know that God has
forgiven every sin, what more do I need to be saved?
• • • • •
God doesn’t need us to focus on our performance, but if
I’m cheating in my willingness to listen, there’s something
seriously wrong.
• • • • •
Graham: Just to say a person is forgiven doesn’t heal the damage
done. Just to forgive a Hitler or an Osama bin Laden would not make
them very desirable neighbors in the hereafter unless they have changed.
But if King Manasseh can be changed (2 Chronicles 33:11–23), so could
they. We must leave that decision in God’s hands. But if I meet one of
them in the Kingdom, I wouldn’t want to know whether he has been
forgiven. I would want to know if he is safe to live next door to. When
Isaiah meets King Manasseh in eternity, he won’t want to know if
Manasseh has been forgiven. He will want to know if Manasseh can be
trusted with a sharp saw, because Manasseh ordered that Isaiah be sawn
in half inside a hollow log (based on 2 Kings 21:16, Hebrews 11:37 and
the early Christian non-biblical text Martyrdom of Isaiah 4:12–5:14)!
So forgiveness alone is not enough. Just because God says, “I forgive
you,” does not mean I’ve been changed in any way. Remember that Jesus
on the cross forgave the people who rejected and tortured Him. They
didn’t even want to be forgiven. So unless we respond to God’s forgiveness, and the kindness of God leads us to repentance and to trust, that
forgiveness has done us no good. In the case of the centurion at the cross,
at least, Jesus’ forgiveness changed his life.
Lou: So Jesus’ prayer for those who were crucifying Him represented the heart of God, how He actually felt towards them at that
moment. But God’s forgiveness meant nothing to them unless they were
open to receive it.
Graham: Right. Unless we respond, it will not make us safe to
save.
Lou: I want to ask the same question, but in another way. Isn’t it
enough to be justified? Do I also have to be sanctified? Are you saying
here that the healing/trust model really challenges that kind of separation?
Graham: Very much so. Of course the words “justification” and
“sanctification” do not occur in the Bible. They are English words drawn
from the Latin. That doesn’t mean they are unimportant. But the Greek
word dikaiosunē could be more literally translated “set right” or “put
right” rather than “justification.” Now if a person has been set right
with God, now loves and trusts Him, and is willing to listen; don’t you
think that person would also say, “What else do You want me to do,
Lord?”
“I want to heal you if you will cooperate.”
“Absolutely! Just tell me, and I’ll follow.”
Back to using the terms from your question, there’s no way to be
justified without sanctification following. If you’re not willing to be
kept right, you obviously haven’t been set right. So being set right and
kept right are all part of the same package. They belong together.
Lou: But I worry a little about this. Consider the following question from the audience: “You’ve made it so complicated. There is so
much to think about: justification, sanctification, and all of this. If what
really is at stake is simply trusting God, why isn’t it enough to say, ‘I’m
going to have the faith of a little child? I’ll just trust God, and don’t
bother me with all the rest of this’”?
Graham: Let’s not underestimate the faith of a little child. The
faith of a little child implies he or she is really willing to listen. So if we
truly have the faith of a little child, we will be willing to listen and to
be trusting, which is why small children need protection. They are too
willing to trust just about anybody. But on the good side, the faith of a
little child is wonderful. My grandchildren will sit there, listen, and
believe anything Grandpa says. I could misuse that trust, but I won’t do
it. Nevertheless, to have them sit and look and hang onto every word is
beautiful. I love it. So if we have the faith of a little child, we’re sitting
there listening to God and saying, “Tell me. Tell me more. Tell me more.”
There’s no way to have the faith of a little child without following along
and being healed. There’s no way to avoid it.
Lou: As I remember the little children in our house, they were
trusting, but they also loved to ask why.
Graham: Oh, that’s part of the faith of a little child.
Lou: You mentioned baptism in the chapter. Would you comment
on how baptism was changed from immersion to sprinkling, pouring, and
a variety of other forms?
Graham: In response, let me cite a footnote in a Roman Catholic
Bible translation. It says, “Admittedly, the early Christian method was
immersion. However, on the authority of the Church and for convenience, it was changed.” The sad thing is, though, that the change to
sprinkling and to pouring has come with a change in the meaning. And
that’s why churches can perform sprinkling and pouring on little infants
who have no understanding that it represents the burial of the old nature
and the rising to a newness of life. With the change of the method has
come a change of the meaning, which is a loss to us. It ought to be a memorable occasion when I say, “I bury the old man, the man I used to be; I
want to start all over again.” The rich symbolism of baptism ties in with
the subject of this chapter.
Lou: You’ve talked of Jesus as our example in this series of conversations about God. We’ve had several questions come in as to whether
Jesus had an advantage over us. How could He be regarded as our example if He did have such an advantage? Let me refer to just one of these
questions. “When Christ came to the world and took on human flesh, did
He take on sinful flesh in essence or vicariously?” The kind of humanity
Jesus had, I think, ties in here in an important way. Would you comment
briefly on that question?
Graham: Well, I’ll cite Paul for that. He said, “Christ came in the
likeness of sinful flesh to deal with sin” (based on Romans 8:3). I think the
question is, can we really look to Jesus as an example of the perfection
that we should have?
Was He exactly like us? There are some interesting differences. For
one, He was born of the Holy Spirit. Some of us might be sixty-five
before we’re born of the Holy Spirit. In that case, when we’re reborn,
we’ve got sixty-five years of bad habits to fight with for the rest of our
lives. Jesus, on the other hand, never acquired a bad habit. The only way
you can develop a bad habit is to do something bad, which He never did.
And so you say, “Well, then, He’s not an example for me.” How low do
we want Him to go? Do we want Him to wallow in the gutter as a wino,
so that He can be an example as to how you can get out of the gutter? I
don’t want Jesus to be more and more like me. I want to be more and
more like Him. He came in human form, in the likeness of sinful flesh,
using no power that is not available to us. And He showed that even little boys can be good. And that you can grow up to be good like that.
“But,” you say, “I have bad habits.”
“Look,” He says, “I’m your Physician; I understand. I’ll be very
patient. And I guarantee I’ll help you get over all of those things. Just
trust Me.”
So how much more would we want Him to do before we accept
Him as an example? He’s certainly enough of an example to show how
we could have lived. The problem is that we didn’t. So what will He do
with us now? He’s the Physician, and He knows exactly what it’s like
to go through what we are going through. So you can count on Him to
be patient. Are you still worried that the Father won’t be as patient as
Jesus? Remember that Jesus came to show just how patient the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are. I think sometimes we run into problems when
we raise the wrong questions about what He came to tell us, and what
He came to show us.
Lou: One final question: “Is the healing we are talking about
dependent upon perfect obedience to Christ’s teaching? Or does God’s
mercy at times supersede even the doubts of those who question His
divine authority?”
Graham: Oh, that’s true. I suppose we could refer to times when
Jesus went places and healed everybody (Matthew 4:24; 8:16; Mark
6:55–56; Luke 4:40). He went through entire villages, and when He
left, nobody was sick. On one occasion He healed ten lepers, and only
one came back to thank Him (Luke 17:12–19). I think on that occasion
Jesus was saying that the Father is a healer, not a destroyer. Jesus
often healed people whether they trusted Him or not (John 5:1–15).
Lou: That’s very comforting. What is our topic for Chapter
Fifteen? How will the healing we talked about here change the way we
relate to God?
Graham: That’s a very good question, because the topic of the
next chapter is “Talking to God as a Friend.” What does God really
want from us? Will He be satisfied with rote obedience to rules? Or does
He desire genuine relationship with the free and diverse creatures He has
made? How do we talk to a God we cannot see, hear or touch, but who
nevertheless much prefers friends to servants? In the next chapter we
will explore how our picture of God impacts the way we relate to Him,
especially in the matter of prayer.
