Chapter Seventeen
Satan’s Final Effort to Deceive
The book of Revelation describes not only God’s last pleading with His
children (Revelation 14:6–12) but also Satan’s final effort to deceive
(Revelation 13:12–18). Though Jesus “saw Satan fall like lightning from
heaven” (Luke 10:18), the defeated enemy of God and man still “prowls
around like a roaring lion” (1 Peter 5:8), knowing that his time is short
(Revelation 12:12). The one whose insane desire to be God led to the war
up in heaven will at last seem to enjoy complete success (Revelation 13:8).
So how can we resist Satan’s last and most diabolical attempt to convince
us of the truthfulness of his lies about God? How will he seek to persuade us to join his side as the great controversy over God’s character
and government comes to its end? Revelation 13 describes Satan’s final
effort to deceive us into accepting his lies as the truth.
When Adolph Hitler knew that he had lost the war, he announced
his intention to bring the whole Third Reich down with him in destruction. The world said he was mad. Satan suffers from a similar madness.
When Jesus said, “It is finished” (John 19:30), Satan knew that he had
lost the war. He knew that the falsity of his charges had been exposed
before the whole family of the universe. He knew that he had failed to
provoke the Son of God to anger and retaliation. He had lost his case.
Like Hitler, his only remaining purpose is to bring as many as possible
down with him at the end (Revelation 12:12).
The Cross and Satan’s Deceptions
How easily Jesus could have used His power to blot out His tormentors at the cross. And He knew, moreover, that if He used His
power, the people would be pleased. They would follow Him, but for
the wrong reason. The people were looking for a Messiah that would use
His power to conquer their enemies and set up an earthly kingdom
where they could rule over the world. What a temptation it must have
been for Christ to demonstrate His power and His majesty, to come
down off the cross and blot out the Roman soldiers, to see all the people
fall at His feet and worship Him. If He had done that, a cry would have
gone throughout Judea and the countries beyond, “The Messiah has
come! The Messiah has come!” How rewarding that might have seemed
for at least a moment.
Satan had done his best to break down Jesus’ trust in His Father
and in His mission to reveal the truth about God. But the things that
God desires the most — love, trust, peace and freedom — are not produced by shows of power or force. They are not produced by terrifying
people until they fall on their faces in fear. So Satan watched in frustrated fury as Jesus, instead of becoming angry, said to His tormenters, “I
forgive you” (Luke 23:34). Satan watched Jesus saying to John, “Please
look after My mother” (John 19:25–27). Satan watched Jesus say to the
repentant thief, “I would be pleased to remember you when I come into
My kingdom” (based on Luke 23:42–43).
Jesus’ behavior at the cross completely refuted Satan’s charges that
God is arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. All the
other questions that had been raised about God’s character and government had also been clearly answered, not with claims, but in very costly
and painful demonstration (see “Three Questions Regarding the
Character of God” in Chapter Eight). The angels in the universe got the
message. They have been celebrating ever since. How do you think Satan
feels when he hears lyrics like the following?
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. . . . You are worthy,
our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power. . . . Great and
marvelous are your deeds, Lord God Almighty. Just and true are your
ways, King of the ages. Who will not fear [reverence], you, O Lord,
and bring glory to your name? For you alone are holy. All nations will
come and worship before you, for your righteous acts have been
revealed. Revelation 4:8, 11; 15:3–4, NIV.
The object of this praise is God’s own righteousness. That is the
crucial issue in the cosmic view that the great controversy theme provides. In the narrower view, we are more preoccupied with what God
has done for you and me. But if that were the primary focus, and it is an
important one (Revelation 5:9–10), they would not be singing about
God’s righteousness. God has been accused of being unrighteous and
unworthy of the trust and worship of His children throughout the universe. That is also the theme of Romans 3:25–26. Jesus died to demonstrate the righteousness and the trustworthiness of our God. Even
before the victory on the cross, as Jesus watched the disciples gradually
learning the truth about His Father, He could say that He “saw Satan fall
like lightning from heaven.” Luke 10:18, RSV.
The Center of Satan’s Deceptive Activity Today
It was insane of the adversary to begin this war over his desire to
be worshiped as God. It is equally insane for him to continue this war,
now that he knows that he has lost. But continue he does, in a mad desire
to bring down as many as he can with him. And since no one in the
wider universe is willing to listen to his charges any more, he concentrates his destructive efforts on us here on this planet. Only on earth can
he find individuals willing to listen, he even finds many who agree with
him. That explains the warning of Revelation 12:
. . .be glad, you heavens, and all you that live there! But how terrible for the earth and the sea! For the Devil has come down to you,
and he is filled with rage, because he knows that he has only a little
time left. Revelation 12:12, GNT.
• • • • •
The apostle John warns that Satan’s final efforts to
deceive will apparently be rewarded with complete success.
For the whole world is described as worshiping him, the
very thing he’s wanted all along.
• • • • •
We are at the center of Satan’s deceptive activity because earth is
where we live. Hence Peter offers a similar warning in 1 Peter 5:8–9,
GNT: “Be alert, be on watch! Your enemy, the Devil, roams around like
a roaring lion, looking for someone to devour. Be firm in your faith and
resist him. . . .”
The apostle John warns that Satan’s final efforts to deceive will
apparently be rewarded with complete success. For the whole world is
described as worshiping him, the very thing he’s wanted all along:
The beast [Satan working through agents on earth], was allowed
to make proud claims which were insulting to God. . . . It was allowed
to fight against God’s people and to defeat them. . . . All people living
on earth will worship it, except those whose names were written before
the creation of the world in the book of the living. . . . This calls for
endurance and faith on the part of God’s people [emphases supplied]. Revelation 13:5, 7, 8, 10, GNT.
These words in Revelation 13 remind us of another text: “Here is a call
for the endurance of the saints, those who keep the commandments of
God and the faith of Jesus” [emphases supplied]. Revelation 14:12, RSV.
So that appeal is made more than once. The closing up of the Great
Controversy and Satan’s final effort to deceive call for endurance and faith
on the part of God’s people.
The Special Target of Satan’s Deceptions
Naturally, those who remain loyal to God are the special target of
Satan’s final effort to deceive. Revelation 12, the chapter that first mentions
the war in heaven, describes God’s loyal ones as being the special objects
of Satan’s wrath (Revelation 12:12). He goes to make war on those called
the Remnant, the ones left over. Those who are the object of Satan’s special wrath are: “All those who obey God’s commandments and are faithful
to the truth revealed by Jesus.” Revelation 12:17, GNT. They do not
accept Satan’s lies.
If we count ourselves among God’s loyal people, we would do well to
notice Satan’s successes through the centuries in deceiving the saints. He
doesn’t normally tempt saints into the gross indulgences, the things which
most saints would never think of doing. Rather, Satan has used insidious
methods to turn saints against our heavenly Father, even while they professed to be God’s chosen people. We remember his original success among
the brilliant angels in heaven. How is it possible Satan could deceive them
right in the very presence of the Father? Yet he did.
We gain some insight into Satan’s deceptions as we consider how he
worked against God’s chosen people in the Old Testament. After the discipline of Babylon and the great revival and reformation that took place
under Ezra and Nehemiah, God’s Old Testament people never worshiped
idols again. Oh, how they read their Bibles, paid their tithe, watched their
diet, and were so very careful not to be contaminated by association with
unbelievers! Oh, how they waited for the coming of their Messiah! You
could say, in principle, they were all eager “adventists.”
Yet, when the Messiah came to live among them, they denounced His
picture of the Father as heretical and unbiblical. They even said the Son of
God had a devil to be talking about His Father that way: “The Jews
answered him, ‘Aren’t we right in saying that you are a Samaritan and
demon-possessed?’” John 8:48, NIV. Imagine them saying that the Lord
had a demon for describing God the way He did! When they said that the
Lord had a devil, they seemed so devout. They were eager to be known as
God’s true people, even working hard to win others to the truth. Recall
Jesus’ own words as He commented on the worldwide evangelistic
efforts of His people in those days:
How terrible for you, teachers of the Law and Pharisees! You
hypocrites! You sail the seas and cross whole countries to win one convert; and when you succeed, you make him twice as deserving of going
to hell as you yourselves are!. . . You give to God one tenth even of the
seasoning herbs, such as mint, dill, and cumin, but you neglect to obey
the really important teachings of the Law, such as justice and mercy
and honesty. . . . Blind guides! You strain a fly out of your drink, but
swallow a camel! Matthew 23:15, 23–24, GNT.
They would win that convert to the Sabbath and all those other things.
Yet their convert might at the same time be a son of hell, as other versions say. They had accepted Satan’s picture of God and completely
overlooked what God really wanted from them.
In saying this I am not being disrespectful to Jewish people. Keep in
mind, when I refer to the Jews, that Jesus was a Jew. Paul was a Jew.
The apostles were Jews. The prophets of the Old Testament were Jews.
Where would we be but for the Jews? Jews have always sought to be
God’s obedient saints. I am simply pointing out that their failings then
were similar to ours now. Notice how their passion to obey God caused
a serious problem for them on crucifixion Friday:
Early in the morning Jesus was taken from Caiaphas’ house to
the governor’s palace. The Jewish authorities did not go inside the
palace, for they wanted to keep themselves ritually clean, in order to
be able to eat the Passover meal. John 18:28, GNT.
Think of what the Passover represented. The Jews rightly and
devoutly wanted to partake of the Passover. But the crucifixion threatened to interrupt their plans. Since the day of the crucifixion was not just
a Passover, but a Passover Friday, there was one additional problem that
faced them:
Now it was the day of Preparation [Friday], and the next day
was to be a special Sabbath. Because the Jews did not want the bodies
left on the crosses during the Sabbath, they asked Pilate to have the
legs broken and the bodies taken down. John 19:31, NIV.
After the bodies were taken down, they hurried home to keep the
Sabbath holy. This is perhaps the most insane thing in the history of the
universe. Having nailed their Saviour to the cross, they ran home to keep
the Sabbath holy in honor of the very One they had just crucified. They
had watched the way Jesus behaved as He suffered. They heard Him say,
“I forgive you.” They heard Him say to John, “Please look after My
mother.” They heard Him forgiving the thief. Jesus had behaved precisely as the Old Testament prophets had said He would. But they were
so deceived by Satan’s lies that they were totally unmoved by this.
Instead they asserted that Jesus was the One who had accepted Satan’s
lies about God.
Satan and Evangelism
At first, Saul (later Paul) shared the same picture of God. His evangelistic methods showed that he, too, had been deceived. He saw nothing wrong in using force or fear to win converts to the kind of God he
worshiped. And he was not alone in this. Jesus had very serious words
for hard working evangelists and soul-winners who portray a false picture of God. What a devastating thing it will be for evangelists to find
out later that this is what they have been doing:
When the Judgment Day comes, many will say to me, “Lord,
Lord! In your name we spoke God’s message, by your name we drove
out many demons and performed many miracles!” Then I will say to
them, “I never knew you.” Matthew 7:22–23, GNT.
In other words, Jesus is saying, “We were never friends. You never really
knew the kind of person I am. By the way you represented the truth to
people, you actually supported Satan’s charges against Me and My
Father.”
Satan and Spiritual Satisfaction
Just as God in many and various ways has sought to reveal the
truth to us (Hebrews 1:1), so in many and various ways Satan has sought
to keep us from seeing this truth. He has tried to deceive us into turning
against this truth, even as we are claiming to believe it. One of his most
successful deceptions has been leading God’s people into a grateful satisfaction. They come to feel that the Lord has blessed them with so much
light that they really don’t need to pursue it anymore. It can even seem
an act of gratitude to God to stop learning and growing. God has favored
them with so much truth that they become conservative and discourage
further investigation. Revelation 3 has a most serious message for such
falsely secure saints:
I know what you have done; I know that you are neither cold nor
hot. How I wish you were either one or the other! But because you are
lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I am going to spit you out of my
mouth! You say, “I am rich and well off; I have all I need.” But you
do not know how miserable and pitiful you are! You are poor, naked,
and blind. Revelation 3:15–17, GNT.
The Greek word for “miserable” above means to be worn out from
hard work. The Laodiceans are worn out from trying to please the Lord.
At the same time they are satisfied with their efforts and what they
believe they have from God. But this combination of hard work and spiritual self-satisfaction does not make God angry, it makes Him sick. The
word translated “spit” above is where we get the English word “emetic.”
That’s why some versions say, “I am going to vomit you out of My
mouth.”
Satan and the Nature of Christ
Other saints are in danger of underestimating Satan’s ability to
deceive and confuse. I have heard many say, “There is no way I could be
deceived when Satan comes as Christ in the last days. I have two or three
things carefully stored away by which I will test him when he comes.”
But I doubt that the Devil will make it that easy on us. History offers
many examples that warn against such overconfidence. For example,
when Jesus suffered, died, and rose again, Satan knew that the great
weight of evidence was against him. Therefore, he worked very hard to
destroy or hide the evidence. One of his most diabolical successes, right
from the beginning, was in leading some to believe that Jesus did not
really come in the flesh. He did not really suffer and He did not really
die. He only seemed to do those things. The group of people who
believed that were known as the Docetists. They taught that Jesus did
not have a physical body, that He did not really die and rise. He was more
like a ghost than a person. This was an effective way by which Satan
sought, right from the start, to destroy the evidence Christ provided of
what God is really like. This idea was widespread in John’s later years:
Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see
whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone
out into the world. This is how you can recognize the Spirit of God:
Every spirit that acknowledges that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh
is from God. 1 John 4:1–2, NIV.
We know historically that people were going around saying Jesus
had not really come in the flesh. John wrote a whole Gospel to show that
Jesus, a real, embodied human being, was also fully God and came to
reveal what the Father is truly like. If Satan can get people to believe
that Jesus was not both human and divine, the clarity of His revelation
of God’s character is lost.
Satan and the Meaning of Salvation
Another way Satan attempted to confuse the evidence was through
the ancient “mystery religions.” Even before the earthly ministry of
Jesus, Satan was at work to undermine and confuse the evidence by
counterfeiting Christ’s first coming. In the mystery religions the central
figure was a dying, rising savior who had been supernaturally born. He
died a cruel and violent death, was exalted up to heaven, and there mediated supernatural help to his followers on earth. Later that savior would
return, resurrect his followers and annihilate the forces of evil. These
mystery religions even had the equivalent of the Lord’s Supper, baptism, washing in the blood, and many other things.
One of the main researchers in this field was a professor who taught
at the University of Chicago just before I got there. His name was
Shirley Jackson Case. He wrote a book entitled, The Origin of Christian
Supernaturalism. He observed, “Of the Gentiles it might truly be said
that there was no salvation without the shedding of blood.” And they
were doing this even before Christ came. Let me share a quote or two:
Long before Christianity arose, there were many Gentile religions inviting those who felt the need of divine assistance for the
inward man. The rites of the various mystery religions offered an
especially good opportunity for the attainment of a new emotional
experience, readily interpreted as an effective acquisition of fresh
divine power. The stimulation of the senses by music and proces-
sionals, the play upon the feelings attending various acts in connection with the rites of initiation, the pledge to secrecy, solemnly
imposed upon all the candidates, the wild orgies connected with
some of the cults, all served to produce the desired emotional agitation. The necessity of presenting oneself voluntarily for membership as well as the purifications and the other preparatory acts only
heightened the effect.
Everything that was done happened to one as an individual.
This strong emphasis on the personal relations between the devotee
and his god gave precisely the sense of divine interest which alone
could produce in needy humanity feelings of solace and satisfaction.
Initiation into the mysteries was likened to the experience of death
itself. It filled one with terror, but issued in triumph. It was easy
for the members of the mystery cults to believe that they were
under the protection of divinities who had successfully engaged in
a mighty cosmic struggle with the forces of evil and men spoke of
being born again, born unto eternity. Shirley Jackson Case, The
Origin of Christian Supernaturalism, 166–167.
Does all of that sound familiar to you? Before Jesus came, Satan was
already working to distract people from the revelation about God that
was coming in Christ. I believe we will see brilliant counterfeits of
Christ’s second coming as well. Popular and apparently spiritual movements are using the wonders of technology to distribute “every wind of
doctrine” (Ephesians 4:14, ESV) all over the globe. Even the most important beliefs and teachings of Christianity are being bent to support
Satan’s position against our God. Even faith, the subject of sin, the
atonement, the cross, law, judgment, Christ’s intercession, the destruction of the wicked, all God’s emergency measures, are being twisted just
enough to obscure the real truth about God.
Do you feel ready for this? Have we oversimplified? Are we in danger of being overconfident? Are we interpreting these truths in such a
way that we are leaving ourselves vulnerable and leading the people we
win to be vulnerable with us? That is why, in the very next chapter, we
are going to talk about why “God Waits for His Children to Grow Up.”
You can trust our God to wait for that to happen.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: The title of this chapter, “Satan’s Final Effort to
Deceive,” makes me think of the fact that Satan has been a deceiver all
along. That’s just his nature. Are you aware of any evidence that we are
into that final time of deception the Bible warns us about?
Graham Maxwell: That question is so significant that we will
devote the whole of Chapter Nineteen to it (“How Soon Will the
Conflict Be Over?”). Are we really in the last days? You and I have both
had fathers who preached the nearness of the End. My father preached
that for fifty-five years, and we’re still here. What’s the reason for the
delay? Are we now in this final period of earth’s history?
Lou: Do you consider it an encouraging sign that our world is at
least talking more about Satan than in the past? There is talk of “black
magic” and there is even a Church of Satan. Does that mean the world
in general is more aware of Satan’s existence and deceptions?
Graham: I think the fact that people talk about Satan so much
should not be interpreted to mean that we are more alert or more ready
for his deceptions. It all depends on what we are saying about him. This
very surge of interest may all be part of his deception. He wants us to
think of him in a way that he is not. Eventually he wants to come in the
guise of Christ.
Lou: Here’s a question I’ve heard asked before: “Since Christ is not
going to come until after Satan’s final effort to deceive, does Satan have
some control over the timing of the End? In other words, if Satan were
to work a little harder, and be a bit more successful, would that help to
hasten the second coming of Jesus? What part does he play in the timing
here?”
Graham: Giving Satan that much credit would be a terrible thing.
It would be as if the text, “Work to hasten the coming of the day of
God” (2 Peter 3:12), were really addressed to the adversary. I think as far
as Satan is concerned, he would provoke the final events immediately,
but the Lord knows we are not ready. And so in mercy He waits, as
Peter also says (2 Peter 3:9). And that’s why the subject after this one
will be, “God Waits for His Children to Grow Up.” If we would be as
ready as Job was, God would allow these closing events to occur right
away; but He’s our heavenly Father, so He waits.
Lou: So Satan does not have controlling power over the timing of
the End. God and he are not partners in this.
Graham: Well, he is being restrained; that is the picture in
Thessalonians (2 Thessalonians 2:6–7) and elsewhere (Revelation 7:1–3).
• • • • •
Up to this point in history, Satan has never been given an
entirely free hand to run things his way, to demonstrate
what the universe would be like if he were in charge. So in
the final period of earth’s history we are going to see this.
• • • • •
Lou: But that brings up another question: “If Satan’s deceptions are
being restrained, that also implies that God is allowing, at least in some
sense, for Satan to deceive. How does that serve God’s purposes in the
Great Controversy?”
Graham: Good question. If God won the victory on Calvary, why
not terminate everything right afterward? After all, look what has happened these last two thousand years and what is happening in the news
most weeks. How does the delay speak eloquently to God’s purposes?
I would say there are things yet to be demonstrated — and not just
about God and His government. Up to this point, Satan has never been
given an entirely free hand to run things his way, to demonstrate what
the universe would be like if he were in charge. So in the final period of
earth’s history we are going to see this. We understand from Romans
(1:18–28), Hosea (11:1–9), and the cross (Romans 4:25), that the seven
angels pouring out the wrath of God means He is giving people up, handing them over. The Spirit ceases to restrain (Revelation 7:1–3) and Satan
will have a free hand. Just before the Second Coming, the whole universe, and even Satan’s own followers, will see how he would run things
if he could run them his own way. And all hell will break loose at that
time.
I think it demonstrates something else also. I wouldn’t blame the
angels for wondering if we rebels could really be as convinced of the
truth as they are. They are all ready to see the seven last plagues and not
interpret them as God’s vengeance. They are also prepared to see the
wicked consumed and not be afraid of God. But they might wonder if we
are. They might also wonder if the truth will be able to heal us to the
point where we could pass through that awful time of trouble and not be
led away from God. Would we think of Him as vengeful during the seven
last plagues? Would we be ready to see the final destruction without
being afraid?
The generation that will be alive to see the Lord come will also be
able to speak eloquently of God’s power to heal, and the power of the
truth to restore the damage done by sin. This last generation has the
great privilege of bringing honor to God. God shows the universe
through them that He can heal with the truth. He can restore sinners to
the kind of trust the angels have. That is a high privilege. We’ll go deeper into that in the next chapter.
Lou: I was fascinated by your reference to ancient mystery religions
that seem to have closely counterfeited the Christian faith. How popular
were these?
• • • • •
Just before the Second Coming, the whole universe, and
even Satan’s own followers, will see how he would run
things, if he could run them his own way. And all hell
will break loose at that time.
• • • • •
Graham: The mystery religions were very popular throughout the
New Testament era and for some time thereafter. They were so popular
that some people joined several of them, just to be on the safe side, like
the altar to the “Unknown God” in Athens. They counterfeited and
confused the issues both before and after Jesus came. One of my teachers
at the University of Chicago, Dr. Harold Rideout Willoughby, was a
real expert on the mystery religions, so we heard a lot about them. He
wrote a long Ph.D. dissertation on rebirth in paganism called “Pagan
Regeneration.” Many of the ideas in the mystery religions are very close
to the truth, and yet they are diabolically perverse. That’s why I came
to the conclusion that the Devil really tried to counterfeit the first coming of Christ. But he failed with many back then, and he has learned
from his failures. With his final, ultimate cunning, he will counterfeit the
Second Coming as far as he can.
Lou: You used the phrase “mystery religions.” Didn’t Paul himself
speak of Christianity as “the mystery of godliness”? 1 Timothy 3:16.
Graham: Yes. That’s right. I think he was using that language on
purpose. It was not that God deliberately kept the truth a secret.
Circumstances did not allow Him to reveal it all (see John 16:12). But one
of the major differences between the mystery religions and Christianity
was this: When you were initiated into one of the mysteries, you were
sworn never to tell anybody. Whereas, the Christian “mystery” was to
be told to everybody. So Paul loved calling Christianity a mystery and
then telling everybody everything about it. So what we have in the
New Testament is a “revealed mystery.” Paul’s hearers would under-
stand that, and would be rather struck with the contrast. We have the
most important information in the universe and, instead of keeping it to
ourselves, we want to tell everybody. The followers of the mystery religions were not allowed to tell; it’s amazing that we know anything
about them at all.
Lou: But was the Greek word that Paul used the same word?
Graham: Yes, musterion. The English word “mystery” comes
from it.
Lou: As you talked about this matter of Satan’s final effort to
deceive, I wondered if you expect that we are going to see direct devil
worship before the end of time, the kinds of things we tend to associate
with other places on earth?
Graham: I don’t think so, especially among the Christian nations.
Satan wants to be worshiped, but not as the Devil; he wants to be worshiped as Christ. And so he masquerades as an angel of light at the End.
He will be worshiped by humans (Revelation 13:8) the way he wanted to
be worshiped by Jesus and the angels. His great moment in history will
be when the cry goes forth, “Christ has come! Christ has come!” and the
world prostrates itself before him; all except the few who will say, “No,
you not only have a devil; you are the Devil.” And you can see why it
would go hard for these few.
Lou: That ties in with what you said earlier. He really isn’t anxious
to be identified as Satan, he really wants to masquerade as Christ.
Graham: That’s the deception. If he came with horns and a tail,
that wouldn’t really fool anyone. Instead, he comes as a gracious
redeemer, the great medical missionary. He heals the diseases of the people and even appears to raise the dead. Since people often use miracles to
validate their beliefs, Satan will deceive many. He will lie to us the way
that older prophet did in 1 Kings 13 (see verse 18). But the way he uses
his authority and relies on miracles will warn the faithful.
Lou: When Peter admonishes us to resist Satan (1 Peter 5:8–9), how
can one resist such a clever, intelligent, wily foe?
Graham: We can only resist him with the truth. We will have to be
so settled into the truth that we cannot be moved.
Lou: If you were to sense the presence of Satan, would it help to
call on the angels? Would it help to recite the name of Jesus several
times? What do you think of such approaches?
• • • • •
Since miracles are the evidences people often use to validate
their beliefs, Satan will deceive many. But the way he uses
his authority and relies on miracles will warn the faithful.
• • • • •
Graham: If you’re using the name for the purpose of “magic,” you
should know that Jesus never went by that name. “Jesus” is an English
pronunciation of the Greek Iesous. His actual name in Hebrew and
Aramaic was Joshua (Yehoshuah or Yeshuah), and I’ve never heard anybody using “Joshua” to scare the Devil away. So I regret it very much
when people use the name of Jesus as a good luck charm. I think it is an
insult to Him and does us a lot of damage. But I hear it all the time.
We’re always singing about those precious two syllables, “Je-sus,” and
He never went by that name. What matters is the Person, not the name.
If we could remember Him and call on Him, that would be the only way
to go.
Lou: But you could use the name “Jesus” at that point.
Graham: Yes, because we know who we mean by it. If I’m thinking
of the real Person when I say “Jesus,” even though that’s an English pronunciation of a Greek transliteration, He will understand that. But if I’m
just using that name as a good luck charm, I might as well use garlic to
scare off vampires and that sort of thing. I think it is diabolical to use His
name as magic. Why would the Devil be scared of the name anyway? But
if Jesus were there, the Devil certainly would flee. So I would want Him
there by whatever name you might call Him.
Lou: But if the Devil could deceive a third of the angels, what
chance do we have to resist him by ourselves?
Graham: Well, there were people in the Bible who did succeed in
resisting him, like Job. Job even called to God for help and no help
seemed to come. And yet he survived.
Lou: But things seemed to get worse when he called for help.
Graham: Things did get worse, that’s right. The more he called for
help, the worse things got. He said, “God, I call and You never answer
me” (based on Job 30:20). And yet Job did not let God down. I believe
God wishes to bring us to the point where we can actually stand singly
and alone, and the only restraint on the Devil is, “You may not take his
life” (Job 2:6). The incredible thing is that Job survived. But did you
notice Job bragging about it when it was all over? Oh no, he was humbled by it all, and he was hardly prepared when God said, in effect, “You
did wonderfully, Job (Job 42:7–8)! When you felt you were doing so
badly, here in heaven I was saying, ‘Now there’s a perfect man.’” But
that was God speaking about Job, Job himself was not conceited (see Job
42:1–6).
Lou: You used the expression “to stand singly and alone.” You
don’t mean standing without God, do you? Do you mean standing alone
as far as the presence of others is concerned?
• • • • •
We can only resist Satan with the truth. We will have to
be so settled into the truth that we cannot be moved.
• • • • •
Graham: Satan was given a completely free hand with Job. Satan
said: “Just let me get my hands on him, and he’ll curse You to Your face”
(Job 2:5). So Satan eventually took everything away from Job. All Job
had to help him, it appeared, were those theologians; and they were all
wrong. They were miserable help (Job 16:2). Satan’s final effort to
deceive may come most persuasively through caring theologians. So we
must be alert. But Job was certainly protected to the extent that Satan
could not kill him.
Lou: Yet he had to trust in the truth, and he was growing in his
understanding of what that truth was, wasn’t he?
Graham: He was still learning and growing at the time of his suffering. At this point I can’t help but use Ellen White’s magnificent
thoughts on what it means to be sealed. It is to be so settled into the
truth, both intellectually and spiritually, that one cannot be moved.
Ellen G. White, Last Day Events, 219; SDA Bible Commentary, vol. 4,
1161. As we have said, that is the work of the Spirit. It was the Spirit of
Truth and his conversations with God that brought Job to a similar place.
It was all God’s doing, but Job’s part was to always say “yes” to God.
And if we can say “yes” to God long enough, the heavenly Physician can
heal us and bring us to the place where Job was.
Lou: In Revelation 12:17 it speaks of those who “have the testimony of Jesus” (KJV). What is this “testimony of Jesus” that the remnant
will have?
Graham: That phrase is also translated, “Bear testimony to Jesus,”
in some versions (RSV). But you can take it either way. In one version of
this phrase, the Remnant hold fast to Jesus’ testimony about His Father.
They believe that what Jesus said about His Father is true. In the other
version, the remnant bear witness to Jesus. They believe in Him, and it’s
their privilege and pleasure to bear witness to Him, the One who
brought them the truth. So it can work either way, you don’t have to
get into the technicalities of the Greek. Whichever way you take it, it
makes sense. You find these kinds of double meanings everywhere in the
Gospel of John and the book of Revelation.
Lou: Is that same thing true when we come to Revelation 14:12? It
speaks about “those who keep the commandments of God and have ‘the
faith of Jesus.’”
Graham: The Greek there is a genitive, “of Jesus.” The Greek genitive expresses relationship or belonging. It can be translated in this case
as “the faith that Jesus had” or as “faith in Jesus.” The Greek technical
point is exactly the same as in Revelation 12:17. It could go either way.
You can have the faith in God that Jesus had, or faith in Jesus as the One
who brought the truth about the Father. If you have either one you’re
going to arrive at the same place. So I like to translate it both ways.
• • • • •
If Satan were to say, “You may investigate me and study
the evidence,” he would be exercising authority the way
God does. But when we start investigating the Devil he
loses, so he won’t do that.
• • • • •
Lou: You have spoken about Satan not coming with forked tail and
hooves and a pitchfork, but masquerading as an angel of light. That raises the question, if he comes as an angel of light, how are we going to recognize him? You mentioned strategies and insights we might have tucked
away because we think they are going to work for sure. But he’s going
to be more clever than that, so I have an uneasy feeling. How will we
recognize him? Especially when nearly the whole world is going to be
worshiping him (Revelation 13:8). What are the best ways to identify the
Devil and his work?
Graham: The answer lies in the one central issue in the Great
Controversy, the question of authority. The goal of God’s authority is
peace and freedom throughout the universe. That’s one thing Satan cannot counterfeit. If Satan were to say, “You may investigate me and study
the evidence,” he would be exercising authority the way God does. But
when we start investigating the Devil he loses, so he won’t do that.
When we compare how Satan and God exercise authority, therefore, we
will be able to perceive that Satan is the adversary.
Lou: So the key is not how well he can perform things that dazzle
and catch our attention?
Graham: That he can do easily.
Lou: So we need to see behind the theatrics to the way Satan exercises authority and the character that motivates his behavior.
Graham: You see, such theatrics could deceive the very elect, if that
were possible (Matthew 24:24). But it’s not possible. The elect are so settled into the truth about God’s way of running the universe that they
perceive the falsity of the Devil’s way.
Lou: Your mention of Revelation 13 raises a question about the
beast and the mark of the beast (verses 16–17). “Do you think that anyone has the mark of the beast now?”
Graham: That depends on what the mark of the beast is. I think
that the best way to understand the mark of the beast is to consider first
the seal of God. And in the next chapter we will consider in some detail
what it means to be settled into the truth.
Lou: I want to come now to something that you touched on a bit at
the conclusion of your presentation. How could we, as Christians, allow
the adversary to deceive us regarding the very truths that we hold? For
example, how could Satan distort “faith” in such a way that it would be
a deception rather than the truth?
Graham: He already has. When people understand that faith is a
religious conviction for which you do not need evidence, they are totally
vulnerable to him. If they truly looked at the evidence, they would not
be deceived because the evidence isn’t with him. But he’s led many
Christians to understand that faith is believing without evidence, without inquiry, without investigation. And so he’s turned faith into a vulnerability, and he has set us all up to be deceived. The idea of blind faith
is widely held. And in the next chapter I’d like to go more deeply into
this.
Lou: But what about the matter of “sin”?
Graham: When he suggests that sin is the violation of an arbitrary
command, he can use the misunderstanding of sin to support his charges
that God is arbitrary.
Lou: Another area he could exploit is understandings of the atonement and the cross.
Graham: On the atonement, Satan is particularly behind the idea
that Christ died to reconcile the Father to us. That He died to assuage
the Father’s wrath. These things are widely held by Christians, but they
imply a God who is vengeful, unforgiving and severe. That is not the pic-
ture of God that Jesus brought. Who had to die to persuade Christ? And
yet He’s also God. Who had to die to win Christ to our side? Yet He
said: “If you’ve seen Me, you’ve seen the Father” (John 14:9). So a widely held Christian view of God could be used to support the Devil’s
charges.
Lou: Would “the law” be another area he tries to distort?
Graham: Yes, when we say that the Sabbath is an arbitrary test of
our obedience, we are saying, “God is arbitrary.” But then we try to
sanctify that by saying, “Well, He’s sovereign. He has a right to be arbitrary. If He seems arbitrary, He really isn’t because He has a right to
be.” My mind begins to go around and around when I hear that kind of
talk. It isn’t logical to talk that way. Behind that kind of talk is the idea
that religion doesn’t have to make sense. And when we say that religion
doesn’t have to be reasonable or logical, we are playing into Satan’s
hands. Since the truth is not on his side, Satan gets us to do this to all
the doctrines. And all the while we are saying that we are Christians.
Lou: What do you see him doing with the word “judgment” or the
idea of the judgment?
Graham: The idea of judgment can be fearsome when we think
that the Father is not as gracious as the Son. When we say, “Don’t be
afraid, we have a friend in court, and that Friend is Jesus,” the Devil
smiles, because that makes it seem the Father is not our friend. Yet the
truth is, the Father is just as friendly as the Son.
Lou: That leads up to the idea of Christ’s intercession; the thought
that the Son has to plead with the Father to forgive us.
Graham: I remember the words of my daughter when she was only
six: “Does that mean God doesn’t love us as much as Jesus does?” Well,
we encouraged our children to raise those questions, and to raise them
early, because they may still have to pass through this experience. Jesus
said: “There is no need for Me to intercede with the Father for you, for
the Father loves you Himself” (based on John 16:26–27). That’s the
plainest testimony about intercession in the whole Bible. We say we
accept the testimony of Jesus, but then we picture Him pleading with
the Father. The Devil must smile when we do this. The most gracious
things about God, he has twisted to his advantage.
Lou: That’s true. But what about that matter of the destruction of
the wicked (Revelation 14:9–11; 20:11–15)? He’s done a number on that
one as well.
Graham: Yes. Satan manages to cover up this deception by keeping
us from discussing religion in simple language. We use euphemisms and
sanctified phrases so that our teachings don’t sound too bad. But the
underlying message of the common position is that God has said to His
children, “You either love Me, or I will torture you in the fire for eternity. Now do you love Me?” It’s the most diabolical thing he’s ever perpetrated on the human race. And even if we say, “No, He won’t burn
you forever; He’ll only burn you as long as you deserve,” Satan’s still
smiling. Just stop to think of what that means. Our heavenly Father says,
“Children, all I want is your love, because all I want is peace and freedom up here. But if you don’t love Me, I’ll burn you as long as you
deserve. Now, I hope I didn’t scare you.” It doesn’t make sense, and religion must make sense. Truth makes sense.
Lou: When you say it makes sense, is there anything about it that
goes beyond my understanding?
Graham: It makes sense that the One who created this whole vast
universe is way beyond my understanding, but I can understand Him
enough to trust Him. I can understand Him enough to know He’d never
say, “Look, you either love Me, or I’ll kill you.” If He said that, it would
make no sense. But then we say, “Well, religion doesn’t have to make
sense. His thoughts are not like ours” (based on Isaiah 55:8–9). True, but
His thoughts are at least as good and gracious as ours.
Lou: Now in the previous chapter on the Three Angels’ Messages,
I think you spent about ninety percent of the time just talking about the
“good news” part. And I was wondering, shouldn’t we have divided the
time equally between all three messages? Why such an overemphasis
upon that first one?
Graham: I think there’s an important message in your observation.
We need to know the everlasting good news before we even start to look
at the other two. You’ve got to know the truth about our God before
you can understand the consequences of rebellion. The truth is our protection. We should go to the world with all three angels’ messages, but
we should always start with number one. Never start with number
three. We need to understand the other two in the light of number one.
That’s why I spend ninety percent of the time on number one.
In the next chapter our topic will be: “God Waits for His Children
to Grow Up.” We need to grow up. And so, in mercy, He waits.
