Chapter Thirteen
How God Treats His Erring Children
What do you think it will be like, someday, to stand in the presence of
the Infinite One and realize that He knows everything about us — and I
do mean everything? Even if we are among the saved, will we be comfortable to spend eternity with Someone who knows us so well? Our
answer to these questions depends on the kind of person we believe our
God to be. In this chapter we will again consider the most convincing
evidence that God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him
out to be; arbitrary, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. The evidence of
how He treats His erring and troubled children points to a God who is
infinitely powerful, but equally gracious.
Face to Face with God
One day we all will stand before God, whether we are saved or lost.
Forbid the thought, but if anyone should die before finishing this chapter, the next moment of consciousness for that person would be face to
face with God. The Bible states this clearly in many places; this is one of
the most vivid:
Then I saw a great white throne and him who sat upon it. . . . And
I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books
were opened. . . . And the dead were judged by what was written in the
books, by what they had done. Revelation 20:11–12, RSV.
Even if we are among the saved, will it be comfortable to spend eternity with Someone who knows us so well? Even though we have been
forgiven, we all have been sinners. Paul is very clear about this in
Romans 3: “There is not even one who is righteous. . . . For all have
sinned, and all fall short of God’s glorious ideal.” Romans 3:10, 23,
TCNT. So even though we are saved and forgiven, will God haunt us
with the memory of our sinful past? As I’ve already mentioned, the
answer depends upon the kind of person we believe our God to be. All
through Scripture God has spoken to this question, not in claims and
promises alone, but with evidence and with demonstration. And surely
the most convincing demonstration was provided by the way Jesus treated even the worst of sinners.
The Woman Taken in Adultery
In the person of Jesus, God was present among us in human form,
face to face with sinners. One of the best known of these sinners was the
poor woman taken in adultery. But she wasn’t the only sinner in that
story. There were also the pious, but heartless accusers who brought her
to Christ in an attempt to trap Him into contradicting the Old
Testament (John 8:5–6). This was not the first time they had sought to
entrap Him like this. But each time they had done it before, He had met
them with His customary skill and grace and the whole occasion had
turned against them. This time, to be sure that they could convince the
crowds in the temple (John 8:2), they made sure they had convincing evidence. So when they brought the woman to Jesus they said they had
caught her “in the very act.” John 8:4, NRSV.
It is immediately apparent from the story what kind of people these
were. According to the Old Testament rules, they should have brought
the man as well (Leviticus 20:10). There is no way they could claim they
hadn’t observed the man involved, because they had said, “We caught
her in the very act,” which would be difficult to do without observing
her partner as well. So their dishonesty was immediately apparent.
After they put this poor woman in front of a large crowd in the temple
(John 8:2), they said to Jesus, “You know the texts in the Old
Testament. You know what the Bible says should be done to this woman.
Do You agree? Should she be stoned, or not?” (paraphrase of John 8:5).
And the whole crowd watched to see what Jesus would say.
Jesus chose to say nothing. Instead He bent over and wrote with
His finger in the dust on the ground. A few footprints, a few puffs of
air, and the record would be gone. It doesn’t say in the Bible that He
wrote their sins, but judging by their reaction, that is what He must
have written upon the ground (based on John 8:6–7). As they looked
over His shoulder and saw their lives delineated in the dust, they left
one by one from the oldest to the youngest. Before they left, though,
Jesus turned to them as He was writing these things down and said, “I
suggest that the one of you who has never sinned throw the first stone
at her” (John 8:7). Then He bent down and went on writing. When they
were all gone (John 8:8–9), He turned to the woman who was left there
and said, “Where are your accusers?” She looked up and said, “I don’t
know. They are gone.” Then He spoke those incredible words to a
woman that had committed a really reprehensible act. He said, “I don’t
condemn you either. Just go home and be a better woman from now on”
(based on John 8:10–11).
How graciously and generously Jesus, the Son of God, sought to
recover the woman’s dignity and self-respect. We marvel at His treatment of her. But what about His treatment of those pious, heartless
accusers? He evidently knew the facts of their lives by what He wrote in
the dust. Why didn’t He gather the crowd a little closer and say, “Let
Me tell you something about these pretentiously pious frauds. Do you
know what this one has done, and that one?” Didn’t they deserve to be
exposed? What does it say about God that He didn’t expose those selfrighteous accusers? Is it that God finds no pleasure in embarrassing His
children? In the first chapter of this book we noted that all His professing
children, good and bad, are members of God’s family. God did not publicly humiliate those men, even though they would have deserved it.
The Woman Who Anointed Jesus’ Feet
Think of the story of Simon, the leper healed by Jesus (Luke 7:36–
50). He invited Jesus to a dinner at his house. During the feast, a woman
anointed Jesus’ feet with expensive perfume. If this scene is the same one
recorded in John 12:1–8, that woman was Mary of Bethany, sister of
Martha and Lazarus. Some scholars understand that this is also the same
woman who was taken in adultery in John 8:3–11.
In the account of Luke 7, the woman tried to keep her actions private, but forgot that the fragrance would fill the air. So the act became
public. Simon said (to himself ), “If Jesus were a prophet, He would know
what kind of woman this is that is touching Him. He would know what
kind of sinful life she lives” (based on Luke 7:39). Jesus spoke up and said,
“Simon, I have something to say to you.” “Speak on,” he said (Luke 7:40).
And Jesus told the story of the two debtors (Luke 7:41–43). Simon realized that Jesus knew his innermost thoughts — which meant that Jesus
knew what a sinner he had been! Simon held his breath to see if Jesus
would expose him before the crowd. Surely, self-righteous Simon
deserved to be exposed. Yet Jesus handled it privately. He maintained
Simon’s dignity and his reputation with his associates. He did not expose
him. At the same time, He graciously accepted Mary’s impulsive act.
Think what these stories tell us about our God.
The Paralytic at the Pool of Bethesda
Jesus had a similar encounter with the paralytic at the pool of
Bethesda. The paralytic had been trying for thirty-eight years to find
healing in the water of the pool. One Sabbath afternoon he looked up,
and the kindest face he had ever seen looked back at him and said,
“Would you like to be well?” John 5:6. Jesus didn’t lecture the man on
the youthful self-indulgence that may have caused his illness in the first
place. He simply said, “Would you like to be well? If so, get up, put your
mat under your arm and go home” (based on John 5:8). Later, Jesus met
him and said, “I suggest you stop sinning, lest something worse befall
you” (based on John 5:14). Jesus always worked in that order — first He
made people comfortable, then He healed them. Especially when dealing
with sinners who might be despising themselves, He first helped them
recover their dignity and self-respect. How can you ask a person to act
with dignity when you have deprived him of his self-respect? God
always restores this first. Later He says to stop sinning, lest something
worse happen to you.
The Disciples in the Upper Room
Perhaps the crowning revelation of the character of God came in
the upper room the night before Jesus was crucified. If you look in
Luke’s account, Jesus said to the twelve, “I have earnestly desired to eat
this Passover supper with you. But the one who is to betray Me is sitting with Me at the table” (based on Luke 22:15, 21–22). They began to
argue with each other as to which one of them would do this terrible
thing. But they also were arguing as to which one of them should be
thought of as the most important (Luke 22:23–24). Can you imagine their
arguing about who was the greatest at the same time they were debating
which one of them was going to betray Him?
How did the Son of God treat them? Did He chide them for their
childish behavior? Or scold them for their unwillingness to wash each
other’s feet? Instead, the whole universe watched as their Creator, the
One they worshiped, arose, got a basin and a towel, got down on His
knees, and washed a dozen pairs of dirty feet (John 13:4–12). He even
washed the feet of His betrayer, Judas. Think what it says about God
that He would treat them in this way.
What moved the disciples was not so much that their teacher and
leader washed their feet. What moved them was that God washed their
feet. Imagine their experience as they looked down on His head bent
over the basin and felt His strong carpenter hands on their feet. Then to
have Him look up and say, “You don’t think My Father would do this,
do you? But He would. If you’ve seen Me, you’ve seen the Father. If
you are comfortable with Me, you will be just as comfortable with My
Father” (based on John 14:7–9).
Think what fools Jesus’ disciples were to miss the opportunity to
wash the feet of the Son of God before He died. What a memory one of
the disciples could have had for eternity! Imagine Jesus meeting him a
million years into eternity and saying, “John (or Peter or James), I’ll
never forget how you washed My feet the night before I was crucified.”
That disciple would never get over it. And they missed out on it because
of their attitude and misbehavior in the upper room.
When Jesus told the disciples that one of them would betray Him,
did He expose that person before the others? No, it says in the biblical
record that when Judas left to do what he had determined to do, they
thought Jesus had asked him to go buy provisions for the feast, or perhaps even to make an offering to the poor:
Jesus said to him, “Do quickly what you have to do.” No one at
the table understood what he meant by this. Some supposed that, as
Judas was in charge of the common purse, Jesus was telling him to buy
what was needed for the festival, or to make some gift to the poor.
John 13:27–29, NEB.
Think how Jesus covered for His betrayer. Why didn’t Jesus expose him
before the others? Of all people, the traitor deserved it! But the traitor
was a member of God’s family, just a seriously misbehaving one. God
takes no pleasure in embarrassing His children.
The Disciples in Gethsemane and the Courtyard
Later that evening, Peter, James and John went with Jesus into the
inner part of the Garden of Gethsemane. Jesus went there to pass
through the awful experience of separation from His Father. This would
answer a couple of questions, “Does sin result in death?” Yes, but what
kind of death? “Is it torture and execution at the hands of our gracious
God?” No, He suffered there alone, apparently abandoned by the Father
(for more on these questions, see the section “Three Questions
Regarding the Character of God” in Chapter Eight). Three times He
came over to where the disciples were dozing, wanting their companionship and comfort. In the end, did He scold them for not helping Him?
No, He made an excuse for them. He said, “The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak (Matthew 26:41). I understand, you three. You were just too
tired.”
Think what they missed! What if the three of them had knelt
around Christ, and put their hands on His shoulder while He went
through that experience. Imagine Jesus running into those three from
time to time in the Kingdom and saying, “Peter, James, and John, I’ll
never forget how you knelt with Me in Gethsemane when I needed you
so much.” What a memory they would have had for the rest of eternity!
But they slept through it all. And Jesus didn’t scold them.
The same Peter had earlier made a bold speech in the upper room,
“Though all the others would desert You, I will give my life for You”
(based on Mark 14:29, 31). Yet a few hours later Peter was cursing and
swearing to prove that he didn’t even know this Christ (Matthew
26:74). Then the cock crowed, just as Jesus had said it would, and Peter
wondered if Jesus had noticed. And though Jesus was on trial for His
life, and had already suffered much, He was more concerned about His
erring disciple in the courtyard than He was about Himself. Luke says
that Jesus turned and looked straight at Peter (Luke 22:61–62). Peter may
well have expected to see indignation and disapproval on Christ’s face.
He certainly would have deserved it. But while he saw sorrow and disappointment to be sure, he also saw pity. It was the face of the One who
had washed his dirty feet the night before. When Peter saw that look on
Jesus’ face, he ran out of the courtyard and wept bitterly.
Consider the account as written by three of the gospel writers:
Matthew, Mark and Luke; beginning with Mark: “And Jesus said to
them, ‘You will all fall away. . . . ’ Peter said to him, ‘Even though they all
fall away, I will not. . . . If I must die with you, I will not deny you.’”
Mark 14:27, 29, 31, RSV. Then Matthew adds:
A maid came up to him, and said, “You also were with Jesus the
Galilean.” But he denied it before them all, saying, “I do not know
what you mean. . . . I do not know the man. . . .” Then he began to invoke
a curse on himself and to swear, “I do not know the man.” Matthew
26:69–70, 72, 74, RSV.
Then Luke adds:
The Lord turned around and looked straight at Peter, and Peter
remembered that the Lord had said to him, “Before the rooster crows
tonight, you will say three times that you do not know me.” Peter went
out and wept bitterly. Luke 22:61–62, GNT.
Later, Judas came in to the same courtyard. He threw down the
thirty pieces of silver and confessed that he had betrayed innocent blood
(Matthew 27:3–4). No doubt he, too, looked at Jesus. Do you think he
saw a different look on Jesus’ face? Did he see anger there? Was there
rejection? He deserved it. But no, Judas was also one of Jesus’ children,
and He was about to lose him. Jesus looked at Judas just as He had looked
at Peter. There was the same sorrow, the same disappointment, the same
pity. Again, it was the face of the One who had just the night before
knelt down and washed Judas’ dirty feet. Overcome with it all, Judas
ran out and committed suicide (Matthew 27:5).
What a wonderful ending it would have been if Judas had been
touched by that look on Jesus’ face, just as Peter had been. How much
better would it have been if he had found where Peter was weeping and
the two of them together had become new men. What a happy ending to
the story that would have been! But all heaven watched a different story
unfold.
Imagine also how Peter must have felt all that Sabbath. During the
previous twenty-four hours he had made a fool of himself repeatedly.
Twice he had made impetuous statements in the upper room. Then twice
he had disgraced himself in the Garden of Gethsemane. Then came the
cowardly behavior in the courtyard, denying that he even knew Christ.
Now Christ was dead, and there was no way he could make it up to Him,
no way he could make it right.
Jesus and Mary
It’s no wonder that when he heard the tomb was empty, Peter was
the first one down there on Sunday morning. But it wasn’t Peter — it
was Mary who had the privilege of seeing Jesus first and taking the good
news to the disciples. Why do you suppose it would be Mary, of all people? The same Mary who was known for living an immoral life? Mary,
out of whom Christ had cast seven devils? Would we have elected her for
that high honor? But God chose Mary.
Later on, when Mary recognized Jesus and fell at His feet to worship Him, didn’t Jesus say something like, “Don’t touch Me! Don’t
touch Me, Mary! If you touch Me, I can’t go to heaven”? What would
that kind of comment say about our God? No, in the language of the day,
this is what He actually said:
“Do not detain me [emphasis supplied], for I have not yet
ascended to my Father. But go to my brethren and tell them that I am
going up to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.”
John 20:17, Noli.
Jesus would have spoken these words kindly and graciously.
Greetings took a little time in those days. He was literally saying to
Mary, “Do not detain Me, Mary, do not go on holding Me or clinging
to Me.” Notice also in the text Jesus calling the disciples “brethren,”
His brothers. These were the very men who had let Him down when He
had needed them so much in Gethsemane. Not only this, when the
angels confirmed Jesus’ command to go and tell the disciples, they added
something that must have overwhelmed Peter when he heard it. They
said: “Now go and give this message to His disciples, including Peter:
‘He [Jesus] is going to Galilee ahead of you.’” Mark 16:7, GNT. How
very God-like of the angels to add, “especially tell Peter.” The angels
admire and worship God for the incredibly gracious way in which He
has handled sinners in His family. How much those angels must have
enjoyed adding the words, “And especially tell Peter.”
There are many more examples we could add. But if we trust Him,
isn’t this the kind of God with whom we would want to spend eternity? We would be spending eternity with Someone who has an infinite
memory, yet we would have no need to be afraid of that memory. For
God is forgiveness personified. He has promised not only to forgive us,
but to treat us as if we had never sinned. Think of all the verses that say
this. For example, “Thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.” Isaiah
38:17, RSV. Or, “You will trample our sins underfoot and send them to
the bottom of the sea!” Micah 7:19, GNT.
There is no pretense or forgetfulness in this. God knows what kind
of sinners we all have been. The angels have watched our every deed.
These things are not forgotten. Yet we are treated as if we had always
been God’s loyal children. But this doesn’t mean that God has gone soft
on sin. Think what it has cost Him to answer the questions and meet the
emergencies that sin has caused in His family.
• • • • •
God has promised not only to forgive us, but to treat us as if
we had never sinned.
• • • • •
On some serious occasions it was necessary for Jesus, gentle Jesus,
to call sin by its right name and denounce it in the strongest terms. One
of these was the time when those pretentiously pious Bible teachers,
trusted so much by the people, denounced Jesus’ picture of His Father
as satanic (John 8:45–52). They were saying that the Son of God’s
description of His own Father was heretical, unbiblical, and diabolical.
And it was Sabbath-keeping, tithe-paying, Bible teachers who made that
accusation. Because of their great influence on the people, Jesus turned to
them and said, “No, it is not I who have a devil. You are of your father,
the devil, and you prefer his lies to the truth” (John 8:45–49). Yet, when
He said that, there were tears in His voice.
The Death of the Wicked
Even in the final, awesome death of the wicked, God is still respecting the freedom and the individuality of His intelligent creatures. He has
made it very plain, all through the sixty-six books of the Bible, that He
doesn’t want to lose any of His children. That is certainly emphasized in
the New Testament. “[The Lord] is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.” 2 Peter 3:9, NIV. It
is emphasized all through the Old Testament as well:
As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn back,
turn back from your evil ways; for why will you die, O house of Israel?
Ezekiel 33:11, RSV.
Like a physician, God stands ready to heal us. But He cannot, will
not, force us to be well. If we prefer to leave Him, He will respect our
decision and sadly let us go. But as we leave Him for the last time to reap
the awful consequences, we will hear His sad cry, “How can I give you
up? How can I let you go?” Hosea 11:8. We discussed this text when we
talked about why Jesus had to die (Chapter Eight). Do you remember the
dramatic story about Hosea and his wife? When God interpreted what
Hosea had done, He said, “I have pled so long, so many centuries, with
My people Israel to please come home. Bring words of repentance with
you, and I’ll heal you and forgive you” (based on Hosea 14:1–4).
• • • • •
Like a physician, God stands ready to heal us. But He can-
not, will not, force us to be well. If we prefer to leave Him,
He will respect our decision and sadly let us go.
• • • • •
Something similar is acted out in the parable of the prodigal son.
Jesus told the story to show how glad God is when anyone does come
home. How eager He is to heal! How magnificent is that story! Notice
the attitude of our Father toward His sinful children:
While he was still a long way off his father saw him, and his
heart went out to him. He ran to meet him, flung his arms round him,
and kissed him. The son said, “Father, I have sinned, against God and
against you; I am no longer fit to be called your son.” But the father
said to his servants, “Quick! fetch a robe, my best one, and put it on
him. . . . And let us have a feast to celebrate the day. For this son of
mine was dead and has come back to life; he was lost and is found.”
Luke 15:20–24, NEB.
Jesus added that there is joy among the angels in heaven whenever
anybody comes back (Luke 15:10). But Israel did not come back in the
days of Hosea. Note this powerful appeal from God: “Come home, Israel,
come home to the Lord your God. . . . Take words of repentance with you
as you return to the Lord. . . . I will heal their unfaithfulness, I will love
them with all My heart.” Hosea 14:1–4, Phillips. But they didn’t come.
“My people are bent on turning away from Me. . . . How, oh how, can I
give you up Ephraim! How, oh how, can I hand you over Israel!” Hosea
11:7–8, Phillips.
As in Hosea, He will sadly hand us over if we insist on turning
away. I understand that God will miss us if we are lost. He will miss us
forever if we don’t come home. Think of the eternal void that brilliant
Lucifer will leave in the infinite memory of God! The good news is that
this magnificent picture of God leads some of us to repentance and to
trust. “Do you not know that God’s kindness is meant to lead you to
repentance?” Romans 2:4, RSV. And when we learn to trust, we will
actually look forward to seeing the Infinite One. Even though He will
come in unveiled majesty and power, we will not be afraid. Sinners
though we all have been, we will be comfortable in His presence for eternity.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: The title, “How God Treats His Erring Children,”
raises a question in my mind, Graham. You have reminded us of some
beautiful, gripping stories! But they all have centered, for the most part,
upon Jesus and how Jesus treated people. And I think we’re fairly clear
about that. We all have that image of a gentle Jesus in our minds. But I
think some still have questions: “What if this were the Father? Would He
be treating people the same way? And what about the Holy Spirit?”
Graham Maxwell: When most people hear the title, “How God
Treats His Erring Children,” does the Father, the Son or the Holy Spirit
come to mind first? I’m hoping that it wouldn’t make any difference, that
we can accept the repeated testimony of Jesus: “If you’ve seen Me,
you’ve seen the Father” (John 14:9). “The Father loves you just as much
as I do” (John 16:26). “And if I go, I will send another Counselor just like
Myself” (John 15:26–27; 16:7, 13–14). It would make no difference;
Father, Son, or Holy Spirit. That’s the most wonderful thing to understand. Everybody loves gentle Jesus, but the Father would treat us exactly the same as Jesus would. We may have to remind ourselves of this
truth many times before we really believe it.
Lou: You used a version for John 20:17 that I’ve never heard of
before. Noli? What translation is that?
Graham: The translator’s name is Theophan (or simply Fan)
Stylian Noli. He was Archbishop of the Albanian Orthodox Church in
America. He produced an unusual version most people have never seen.
I enjoy it very much. And there’s a reason why I chose it. The Greek of
John 20:17 literally means, “Don’t go on holding Me, don’t go on touching Me, don’t cling to Me, because I must go.” What Jesus said was
actually very polite and gracious. So I love the translation, “Do not
detain me.” I went through my many versions and Noli had it closest to
the meaning of the Greek.
Lou: I noticed that with the exception of Hosea, your stories about
God’s kindness are all from the New Testament. Does that mean that the
God revealed in the New Testament is really gentler than the One
revealed in the Old Testament?
Graham: The only remedy for that is to go through all sixty-six biblical books and note how much tenderness there is in the Old Testament.
For example, you could look at the parable of God in His vineyard (Isaiah
5:1–7), something you’ve preached on many times. How tenderly that
story is told. “What more could have been done for my vineyard than I
have done for it?” Isaiah 5:4, NIV. Or, “My people . . . how have I wea-
ried you?” Micah 6:3, ESV; see also Isaiah 43:24. Of course, the whole
book of Hosea is so moving. So are the texts where God says, “Anyone
who touches you, touches the apple of My eye” (Deuteronomy 32:10;
Zechariah 2:8). That is sometimes translated, “Anybody who hurts you,
My people, sticks his finger in the eye of the Almighty” (based on
Zechariah 2:8). That would hurt! And God says, “That’s the way I feel
about you.”
One of the most impressive Old Testament stories, though, is
God’s treatment of David. Now David sinned enough to be disfellowshiped from most churches, yet God says to his son Solomon, “Solomon,
obey Me in all things, just as your father David did” (based on 1 Kings
11:6). That is one of the most generous statements in the whole Bible, so
I will use it again when we talk about the subject of perfection (Chapter
Fourteen).
Lou: Graham, you referred to this beautiful scene in the New
Testament where a woman taken in adultery is brought to Jesus and He
says, “Neither do I condemn you” (John 8:3–11). But when you go back
to the Old Testament, God is ordering the destruction and death of
Achan and his family (Joshua 7). Why would there be that apparent discrepancy?
Graham: If Jesus had agreed that the woman taken in adultery
should be stoned, He would probably have had a large following. They
would have approved of this. One explanation of the Achan story is that
Achan did not repent, and so he had to be stoned. The woman taken in
adultery did repent, which raises the interesting question: Had she not
repented, would Jesus have joined in stoning her? I don’t think so!
I’d rather look at the Achan story in its total setting. In the case of
Achan, there was irreverence, there was lack of trust. They were about
to go into Canaan. God needed to make an important point in that context, whether or not there was repentance on Achan’s part. With the
woman taken in adultery the situation was different. It called for Him to
say something else. His gracious treatment of this woman who had been
taken advantage of, and His incredibly gracious treatment of those pretentiously pious accusers, is what needed to be said at that time.
Everything God does in Scripture is designed to say something that
needs to be said at that time, and when you take the Bible as a whole,
you see a consistency in it.
Lou: Jesus is so gentle with them in John 8. And that’s what His
ministry was like for three and a half years. But then, in the early
church, you have the story of Ananias and Sapphira (Acts 5:1–11), something similar to the Achan story.
Graham: And the third angel’s message is fire and brimstone
(Revelation 14:10–11).
Lou: So why couldn’t God act throughout the whole biblical period the way He acted during those three and a half years?
Graham: As I understand it, those three and a half years were a
demonstration of God’s ideal way of doing things. This is the way
He would like to do it all the time. It wasn’t well received by many.
Some despised Him for being so gentle. He was gentle with everybody.
He was gentle with Judas, gentle with the men who nailed Him to the
cross. This is the way God wishes to act for all eternity. He was demonstrating that you can only govern that way when the people you are governing are impressed favorably with that, when they respect you and do
not misunderstand this gentleness as weakness. But where there is rebellion and disrespect, God has had to act differently.
• • • • •
Jesus’ three and a half years of ministry were a demonstration of God’s ideal way of doing things. This is the way He
would like to do it all the time. It wasn’t well received by
many. Some despised Him for being so gentle.
• • • • •
Lou: This ties in with what you have talked about before. When
God doesn’t act with that kind of gentleness, we’re in emergency situations where the uniqueness of the situation calls for an action appropriate
to that situation, even though that action is still based upon love.
Graham: That’s right. I love going through the sixty-six books of
the Bible to see the consistency there. God all the way through is trying
to say and demonstrate what needs to be said — under varying circumstances with the whole universe looking on.
Lou: But when God comes in the person of Jesus Christ and acts
with gracious acceptance, we take Him out and crucify Him!
Graham: Yes, they didn’t respect Him for this. They would have
respected Him more if He had said, “Let’s stone that woman, and I’ll
throw the first stone.”
Lou: They really didn’t want the kind of God that Jesus talked
about.
Graham: That’s right. They even said He was possessed of a devil
to describe God in that way (John 8:48). Yet He wept even as He
denounced them for doing this.
Lou: This question has come up again and again: “If God is as kind
as Jesus is, how can He turn and destroy sinners in the end?”
Graham: If all God really wants is love and trust freely given, He
can’t say, “You give Me that, or I’ll destroy you.” So that leads me to go
back to the Bible and try to understand what He means when He says,
“I will destroy.” For example, when the Israelite King Saul committed
suicide the Bible said, “Thus God slew Saul” (based on 1 Chronicles
10:13–14). Yet God never laid a hand on him (1 Samuel 31:2–5)! And
then, of course, there is the cross. Jesus died as sinners will die, yet God
did not destroy His Son. So I think we can find a consistent meaning
through there.
It’s true that God uses the word “destroy” in the Bible. It is language that we can understand when we are hard of hearing and have to
be almost terrified to take God seriously. But if we really want to know
what He will do to the wicked in the end, look at what happened to His
Son. He died the death of a sinner.
Lou: So what DO the many biblical references about God destroying the wicked mean?
Graham: I particularly want to know what He’s going to do to me
if I’m a lost sinner in the end. The Bible says, “He made His Son to be
sin, though He knew no sin” (based on 2 Corinthians 5:21), and He died
the sinner’s death (based on Romans 8:3; 1 Peter 2:24). So I should go to
the cross and watch Jesus die the sinner’s death. The death of the
wicked is absolutely devastating, but God isn’t taking you by the scruff
of the neck and saying, “Since you’ve chosen not to love Me and trust
Me, I am going to kill you as painfully as I know how.”
Lou: Here’s a question that reflects a widespread concern. “Are
you saying that God never really kills anyone? What about the Flood?”
Graham: I believe God has put millions of His children to sleep in
what the Bible calls the first death. And He promises them all resurrection, something none of us could do if we should take someone’s life. At
the Flood, the Life-giver interrupted many lives. None of them are even
aware that they are asleep. God will awaken each one in the resurrection,
either the first resurrection for those who have trusted God or the second resurrection for those hardened in rebellion (based on Revelation
20:4–6). Yes, I would see God doing that.
But taking away our eternal life in the end, what the Bible calls the
second death (Revelation 20:6, 14–15), I believe that destruction is not
at His hands. That’s when He leaves us, gives us up to the awful consequence of our choices. And cries as He gives us up, just as He did in
Hosea (Hosea 11:8). But the difference between the first and the second
death and how God acts in relation to them is a very biblical distinction.
Lou: This is a bit of a footnote, but someone raised a question about
the story of the woman taken in adultery (John 8:3–11). She said that she
had tried to find it in her Bible and it wasn’t there. Why is that?
Graham: That would be a serious loss. It’s one of the greatest stories in the Bible and absolutely unique. But it’s actually missing in the
earliest manuscripts. When it does appear, sometimes it is between John
7:53 and 8:11. Sometimes it’s in another part of John or at the end of
John. One or two manuscripts have it in Luke. Scholars agree that
they’re not quite sure where it belongs. But lest we be disheartened,
they also agree there is no way anybody would have made up such a
story. It ran so counter to the thinking of the day. There is no way some
monk in a monastery would have thought up a story like this, where God
would be so generous to an immoral woman! He wouldn’t do it. So the
general agreement is that the story bears all the earmarks of genuineness
and should be left where it is in most manuscripts. But some versions put
it in brackets and others in a footnote. Some leave it out entirely. I would
say to people, don’t give up too soon. Look in the footnote, then look at
the end of John, then look at the Appendix before you decide it’s not
there. The issue in the manuscripts is more about where the story
appears, than whether the story is a faithful representation of Jesus.
Lou: In your presentation, you referred to the fact that we will be
comfortable with God even though we are in the presence of Someone
who knows everything about us, even things we ourselves may have forgotten. Yet there are references in Scripture about how God has taken all
our sins, put them in the depths of the sea, and will remember them no
more (Jeremiah 31:34; Micah 7:19; Hebrews 8:12; 10:17). Wouldn’t it be
more reassuring to say, “He has blotted them out and they just don’t figure into any recollection whatsoever”?
Graham: Yes, I think some derive comfort from the thought that
God will be unable to remember their sins, some kind of divine amnesia.
They would prefer that none of their neighbors and friends, especially
their guardian angels, will know about their sins or be able to remember
them. But I think it shows even more trust in God to understand that He
can remember very well, but He would never haunt anyone with this
memory.
• • • • •
The history of the Great Controversy will be the history of
the evidence of how God has won that conflict. He will
never destroy the evidence, or the conflict could arise again
and again.
• • • • •
Now there is a vital reason for none of us forgetting, not even God.
The history of the Great Controversy will be the history of the evidence
of how God has won that conflict. After He has won it, He will not
destroy the evidence, or the conflict could arise again and again. This
explains why Jesus is pictured as keeping His human form (Luke 24:36–
43; John 20:26–28; Acts 7:56). You may remember the wonderful painting of a little girl sitting in Jesus’ lap, picking up His hand and saying,
“How did You get this mark?” Should that happen, will He say, “I don’t
know, I’m hoping somebody can tell Me some day”? Of course not!
There’s no point in His keeping His human form if the whole thing has
been forgotten.
There is even further evidence that the record of sin will not be forgotten. The sins of many saints up there have been recorded in
Scripture. In order for the record of David’s sins to be forgotten, all
Bibles would have to be destroyed, along with all memory of the Bible’s
contents. Psalm 51, David’s beautiful prayer for a new heart and a right
spirit, would have to go. All that would be gone.
Lou: I suppose statements about our sins being “blotted out” and
buried “in the depths of the sea,” are God’s way of reassuring us that
though He knows us that well, He loves us and accepts us just as though
we had never sinned.
Graham: My mother knew me very well, better than anyone.
When I was invited to come to Loma Linda in 1961, she could have come
before the Board and said, “You don’t want my son. Let me tell you
some of the things he has done.” Yet I wasn’t concerned. I knew my
mother would rather die than say such a thing! I knew my reputation
was absolutely secure with my mother and with my father. Well, if our
reputation can be secure with our parents, our reputation is totally
secure with God.
Lou: Perhaps we are comfortable with God remembering. But what
about our remembering, Graham?
• • • • •
No one will be admitted to the hereafter who cannot be
entrusted with the memory of other people’s sins.
• • • • •
Graham: No one will be admitted to the hereafter who cannot be
entrusted with the memory of other people’s sins. God does not want
us going up to Rahab and saying, “Hey, tell us a little. What was it like
before you met the two spies?” That’s why in the middle of Paul’s list
of dreadful sins in Romans 1:28–32 is the sin of gossiping. And then
there’s 1 Timothy 5:13, RSV, where Paul talks about people who not
only go from house to house learning to be idle but become “gossips and
busybodies, saying what they should not.” Such people would not be
safe to save for the Kingdom. They would make life a misery for everyone else. There will be no news service up there spreading the bad news
about the things the rest of us have done.
Lou: I want to press you just a little bit further on this. I’m not
thinking so much about my recollection of what others may have done.
I’m thinking about the burden of my own memory and the things I’d like
to forget.
Graham: I think that might require some good conversations with
the Lord, and God would say, “Look, I’m not thinking about them. Why
are you? Don’t worry.”
And you might say, “Well, I was afraid You might bring it up.”
“Really? No, not a chance.”
Lou: I suspect that I will be praising Him throughout eternity for
being that kind of God!
Graham: Absolutely! And time is so healing, isn’t it? I know
people who have had enemies who became their best friends. And when
that happens you don’t bring up those unpleasant occasions anymore,
except maybe to laugh about them. I can think of a couple of people who
have hurt me, but I am now on very good terms with them. We never
think about that anymore. We’re almost better friends because of it.
That’s why David and Uriah can meet in the hereafter and not come to
blows.
Lou: Here’s a question related to the previous chapter (see section
“The Teachings and Example of Jesus” in Chapter Twelve). “Why did
Jesus heal the paralytic on the Sabbath?”
Graham: Many of His Sabbath healings were elective, weren’t
they? After all, the paralytic had been by the pool of Bethesda for thir-
ty-eight years. This was no emergency. As a rule I think Jesus tried to
keep a low profile. If He became very public, His actions would be so
controversial that He wouldn’t last very long. But when it came to the
Sabbath, He risked His life repeatedly to clear the Sabbath of misunderstanding. An arbitrary approach to the Sabbath puts the Father in the
worst possible light. So Jesus ran the risk of healing and helping to
redeem the Sabbath of arbitrariness, because the Sabbath speaks so eloquently of God. And He ran into trouble every time.
Lou: Here’s another very important question: “In the parable of
the prodigal son, the father just forgives. No one has to die. There is no
sacrifice or animal that has to be killed, and the Father doesn’t have to
die. Why couldn’t God forgive all of us in the same way?”
Graham: Well, in a way He does. I think the story was told in that
way to indicate that absolutely nothing had to be done to persuade the
father to love his son and to forgive him (Luke 15:11–32). I believe the
father had forgiven the son long before the son headed for home. But
that’s not the whole story in the Great Controversy. God is forgiveness
personified, but questions have been raised. God has been accused, and
these questions must be answered. Satan’s charges must be met. All the
misunderstandings regarding the consequences of sin or the seriousness
of sin must be handled. And that’s why more has to happen than this
story tells. But the story is clear that nothing needs to be done to win
the Father to our side, to “assuage His wrath,” before He’ll forgive. The
story of the prodigal son is really more about the father than the son. We
call it the story of the prodigal son. But it’s actually the story of a father
who was so delighted that his son came home, he didn’t even let his son
finish his speech of repentance.
Lou: Several people wanted you to retell the rat poison story to
again underline the difference between the legal approach and the “larger view” you have been talking about in this book.
Graham: Just to give the essence of it, the difference is this. In the
legal way of approaching the plan of salvation, the father says to the son,
“If I catch you taking that poison, I’ll kill you!” Then the father hears
the son falling down in the garage. He runs in there and finds the son
drank the poison and is dying. And the father reminds him, “The punishment for drinking the poison is that I’ll kill you.” And the boy says,
“Please forgive me.” And the father says, “Well yes, Son, I love you, so
I’ll forgive you.” The trouble is, being poisoned, he dies anyway. The
legal model has difficulty conceiving of sin as a poison in itself, that sin
is intrinsically bad.
In the other model, the father says to his son, “Don’t touch the poison, I don’t want you to die.” He runs out to the garage. The boy is
dying. Forgiveness would not keep the boy from dying. The boy needs
an antidote. If only he’d trust his father enough, the father could heal
him. That’s the key difference in these two models. Is the death from sin
an imposed penalty because we have offended the One in charge? Or is
the death that comes from sin the result of poisoning ourselves? We
don’t need forgiveness as much as we need a healing antidote. And if
we trust God, He can heal the damage done. That’s the difference
between the two: Sin is not primarily a legal infraction, it is a poison.
Lou: That seems like an absolutely pivotal understanding. It makes
a real difference in terms of how God views sin and why God hates sin.
It isn’t just His personal opinion.
Graham: No! He doesn’t want us to die! And certainly He wouldn’t kill His dying Son, would He? Would He say, “Hey, don’t die too
quickly, because I have to kill you as a penalty”? Doctors don’t kill their
dying patients, and God does not kill His dying children.
Lou: Thinking further about the prodigal son story, is it necessary
to repent and to confess one’s sins before one is forgiven?
Graham: In the story, the boy had hardly begun to speak when the
father interrupted and said, “I forgave you long ago.” An even more
stunning illustration is Jesus forgiving on the cross. There was no indication that the soldiers who were nailing Him to the cross were saying,
“Please forgive us; please forgive us.” They didn’t even ask, and He
said, “I forgive you anyway” (Luke 23:34). God is forgiveness personified.
On the other hand, our response to God’s forgiveness does matter.
The offer of forgiveness does us no good unless we are moved by His forgiveness to repent. We often have it the other way around, “If I repent,
maybe He will forgive me.” Instead, it is learning of His forgiveness that
moves us to repentance — some of us, anyway. As Paul said in Romans,
it’s the kindness of God that leads us to repentance (Romans 2:4). But
God’s kindness doesn’t make repentance unimportant. If I don’t respond
to His gracious forgiveness, it doesn’t do me any good. Repentance
means changing my mind and confessing, “I am sick, help me, what must
I do to be well?”
Lou: So the difference here is based on the reason we come to God.
Are we drawn by His gracious character? Or do we hope that our repen-
tance and confession will win God over to where He might be willing to
forgive us? In that case, the story would have the father saying to the
prodigal son, “Well, since you have made all these promises, maybe I’ll
welcome you home.”
Graham: I want to say this very reverently, but if it requires that
I bring the blood of His Son to God before God can say, “Well, now I
can forgive you,” that denies the prodigal son story. You don’t have to
bring Him anything. God sent His Son to die to answer all those questions and to draw us to Him, to handle all the emergencies in the Great
Controversy. Why? Because He had already forgiven us, but we didn’t
know it. He sent the Son to make it clear. And the Son hanging on the
cross said, “I forgive you. You don’t understand what you’re doing.”
That’s incredible! That kind of forgiveness wins some to repentance. It
won one of the thieves hanging on the cross next to Him.
Lou: What is our topic for Chapter Fourteen? Please introduce
where we are going next.
Graham: The title of the next chapter is: “God Can Completely
Heal the Damage Done.” It’s really talking about perfection, a topic
which has probably given many people hypertension or ulcers. It is a
topic that can be very discouraging. But in the Bible, perfection is not a
requirement. Perfection is an offer. Do you want to be well or not? How
well do you want to be? The message of perfection, instead of being forbidding, can be very comforting news.
Lou: So this chapter is about God’s wonderful treatment of us.
The next chapter is about how He goes on to heal us.
