Chapter Two
What Went Wrong in God’s Universe
The Bible describes sin as a breakdown of trust and trustworthiness, a
stubborn and suspicious unwillingness to listen. In the biblical perspective, sin is much more than mere “breaking the rules”. Left untreated, sin
makes peace impossible. Sin began in heaven, in the mind of God’s most
honored and trusted angel. Revelation 12 describes the context of conflict and even war within God’s family, developing right in His very
presence.
This raises a question. What really went wrong in God’s universe?
This question is important because understanding what went wrong
helps us to understand the methods God is using to put things right
again. In the larger view of the Great Controversy, the plan of salvation
is God’s way of setting things right in such a way that they will never
go wrong again.
To understand what went wrong, it helps to consider what made
things go so right before the war in heaven began. Before the war there
was peace. There was peace because all the members of God’s vast family trusted each other. They trusted their heavenly Father. And He in
turn could safely trust in them. Where you have that kind of mutual
trust and trustworthiness, there is perfect peace, perfect freedom, and
perfect security.
What Sin Is All About
A crisis of distrust, nevertheless, developed in the family. As we
reviewed earlier, our heavenly Father has been accused of being unworthy of our trust. Specifically, He has been accused of being arbitrary,
exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. And thus sin entered our
universe for the first time. In the Bible, sin is much more than a mere
breaking of the rules, serious as that might be. In its essence, sin is a violation of mutual trust. It is a breakdown of trust and trustworthiness, a
stubborn unwillingness to listen to the One who is so eager to help us
in our predicament.
Doesn’t the Bible specifically state, however, that sin is breaking
the rules? How about the key text we’ve learned from childhood up,
“Sin is the transgression of the law”? 1 John 3:4, KJV. Actually, that’s
a rather free translation. The Greek word that John used is anomia, and
it means, literally, lawlessness. “Everyone who commits sin commits lawlessness; sin is lawlessness.” 1 John 3:4, Williams. In other words, sin is
described as a state of mind, an attitude. And anyone in that state of
mind is a continuing threat to the peace and security of the universal
family. Sin will not have been truly dealt with until our lawlessness has
either been changed or eliminated. Sin begins with a lawless, rebellious
state of mind.
The hazard of regarding sin primarily as breaking the rules is that
such a mindset tends to encourage an impersonal, even fearful relationship with God. If we regard sin as primarily a breaking of the rules,
God’s commandments may be misunderstood as arbitrary regulations
designed to show His authority and test our willingness to obey. If we
obey, we’re rewarded. If we disobey, we’re destroyed. Would you want
to live under those conditions?
Since we all have sinned, should we be fearfully awaiting the execution of the sentence? Or have we been spared because God found some
legal way to give us yet another chance? And if we turn down that second chance, will He punish us with even greater severity for our ingratitude? Would such an understanding help produce the peace and the
freedom from fear that God desires so much in His universal family?
Actually though, if rightly understood, there is a sense in which
one can say that sin is a breaking of the rules. Let’s look again at God’s
commandments, particularly the Decalogue. All the Ten
Commandments ultimately require is that we love God and we love each
other (Matthew 22:36–40). And if we really did that we would have
peace and freedom. In fact, in the tenth of the Ten Commandments it
says that we should not even want to sin. If we lived in that state of
mind, not even wanting to do anything unloving, we would have freedom to be sure, and all kinds of peace and good will.
But can love actually be commanded? Or produced by force or by
fear? Has God ever said to His children, “Love Me, and love each other,
or I’ll have to kill you”? Have you husbands ever tried that on your
wives and children? Did it work? Imagine your wives and children trembling in front of you and saying in unison, “Oh, yes, Daddy. We love you
very much.” Would you be pleased? Would you be satisfied? If so, then
you’re a brute. And the God some of us worship would never settle for
that.
Having said that, we all must admit that the Bible is full of references to law, discipline, punishment and rewards, even final fiery
destruction. And since our purpose in this book is always to look at the
Bible as a whole, not just “here a little and there a little,” we must look
at all these other passages seriously. In fact, several chapters of this book
will be devoted to God’s wide use of law and why Jesus indeed had to
die. And we will talk about how, in reality, God’s law is no threat to our
freedom! To understand that is really the truth that sets us free.
Going back to the beginning, sin entered our universe when angels
ceased to trust. As a consequence, they themselves became untrustworthy. James 4:17 (RSV) offers a familiar definition: “Whoever knows what
is right to do and fails to do it, for him it is sin.” It is rebellious to act
that way. It is lawless to act that way. Anyone who behaves like that is
certainly not trustworthy to have around in a free universe.
Look at Romans 14:23 in several, different versions: “Any action
that is not based on faith is a sin” (Moffat). “Whatever does not proceed
from faith is sin” (RSV). “When we act apart from our faith we sin”
(Phillips). In a text from the book of Ezra, the Jews who returned from
Babylonian captivity are confessing that they have done several things
that they should not have done. But they describe their misbehaviors in
these words: “We have broken faith with our God” (Ezra 10:2, RSV).
“We have been unfaithful to our God” (Ezra 10:2, NIV). These texts
underline that the essence of sin is a breach of faith; it’s a breakdown of
trust and trustworthiness.
Sin as a Breach of Trust in the Story of Moses
I know of no greater illustration of how sin is a violation of trust
than the one involving the great saint Moses. When the people were
complaining about the lack of water, they came to Moses and grumbled.
They even said they wished they had died in the wilderness. “Why did
you bring us here from Egypt? We have no water” (based on Numbers
20:5). They behaved so badly that Moses ran to God and prayed, “God,
what shall I do?” And God said: “Give them water. Take your rod and
go to the rock and speak this time. Don’t hit it, don’t make a scene, don’t
be angry with the people or condemn them. Just speak to the rock, and
they’ll have all the water they want” (based on Numbers 20:7–8).
Instead of following God’s instructions, Moses went back to the
rock, struck it smartly (Numbers 20:11) and said: “You ungrateful rebels!
Must we bring forth water from this rock?” Numbers 20:10. According
to Numbers 20:12 (NIV), God responded: “Because you did not trust in
me enough to honor me as holy in the sight of the Israelites, you will not
bring this community into the land I give them.”
Now on the surface, doesn’t that seem a bit arbitrary and severe?
All the old man did was to get irritated and impatient. He disobeyed
God by hitting the rock with his rod. Was that enough to keep him out
of the Promised Land? For forty years he had led the people. And think
what he had put up with all those years. But God says, “Because of what
you did at the rock you may not take this people in.” Does that seem
severe, for God to treat His old friend like this? How could what Moses
did be serious enough to call for such a terrible consequence and penalty?
Understandably, Moses begged God, “Please may I take the people
in?” And finally God said, “Speak to Me no more on this matter.”
Deuteronomy 3:26. Now how could it be that serious? Or is the answer
in the text that we read? It doesn’t say in Numbers 20:12, “Because you
disobeyed Me, you cannot take the people in.” It actually says, “Because
you did not trust in Me enough [emphasis supplied] to honor Me as
holy in the sight of the Israelites, you may not bring the people in.”
Why?
Moses was one of the best friends God ever had. God talked to him
face to face, even more directly than the visions and dreams He gave to
the prophets. He said, “I talk to Moses face to face as a man speaks to
his friends” (see Exodus 33:11). So the people knew Moses had a special
relationship with God. They revered him — at least when they were
behaving. They had seen him go up on Mount Sinai and come down carrying the Ten Commandments (Exodus 32:15–16). If your pastor came
down a mountain carrying the Ten Commandments with his face shining so brightly that you couldn’t look at him, wouldn’t he have
increased influence in your congregation?
Moses had enormous influence with the people of Israel. That’s
what made his behavior at the rock so serious. He said, “Must we
[emphasis supplied] bring forth water from this rock?” Numbers 20:10.
Moses implied with the “we” that he was speaking and acting in God’s
behalf (Numbers 20:10–11). Moses had pictured God as angry when He
was not. God had wished by His kindness to lead some of those Israelites
to repentance (Numbers 20:7–8; see also Romans 2:4 and 2 Peter 3:9).
But by his behavior, Moses deprived God of that opportunity. Standing
as they were on the verge of going into Canaan to meet those well-armed
tribes there, they needed to trust God very closely. And God purposed
to win them over to trust, in spite of all their complaining and grum-
bling. He was not going to condemn them or criticize them; just give
them abundant water in one of the driest of deserts. “Moses,” He said,
“don’t even strike the rock” (Numbers 20:8). But Moses pictured God as
angry.
What a contrast to the way Moses had behaved earlier when God
said, “I’m tired of these people. Step aside. Let Me destroy them and
I’ll make a great nation out of you” (see Exodus 32:10). At that time
Moses responded, “God, You couldn’t do that. Think what it would do
to Your reputation. What would the Egyptians think? They would
assume that You couldn’t take Your people to the Promised Land!”
Exodus 32:11–13. And God said, “I love that, Moses. Who knows Me
as well as you do? You really are My friend” (see Exodus 33:9–11). But
later on, under pressure, Moses let God down. He misrepresented God
as vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. And that was precisely Satan’s sin
in the beginning, the sin that is the most devastating of all.
God has honored His friend Moses ever since. He even personally
buried him (Deuteronomy 34:6), resurrected him (Jude 1:9), and later sent
him down to comfort His Son on the Mount of Transfiguration
(Matthew 17:3–4; Mark 9:4–5; Luke 9:30–33). But God had to go on
record before the eyes of the onlooking universe regarding the terrible
seriousness of Moses’ sin. It wasn’t just about disobedience, or that by
smiting the rock he had “spoiled a symbol.” He had certainly done both.
But more than that, Moses had broken faith with God. The most
destructive thing a person can ever do is to be a person of influence and
misrepresent the truth about God. Moses hadn’t shown himself to be
God’s trusted, trusting friend. And that’s the essence of sin.
How many of us have committed the same sin in words or actions?
How many of us have hurt our own children, and others, who trust us
to tell the truth about our God? Have you ever apologized to God for
putting Him in a bad light or leaving the impression that He’s not the
kind of person we know Him to be? Moses repented and became a better
friend of God than ever before. But so many people have continued to
mistrust.
The Consequences of Mistrust
• • • • •
Sin changes us, producing fear and mistrust of God.
• • • • •
Sin changes us, producing fear and mistrust of God. The results of
centuries of mistrust are catalogued in Paul’s letter to the Romans. Let’s
look first at Romans 3. What makes this quotation from Romans so significant is that it’s made up of six Old Testament passages; one from
Isaiah, and five from the Psalms (in the order they are quoted in Romans
3:10–18: Psalms 14:1–3, 5:9, 140:3, 10:7; Isaiah 59:7–8; Psalm 36:1). This
is a summary of the Old Testament picture of the consequences of mistrust:
As the Scriptures say: “There is no one who is righteous, no one
who is wise or who worships God. All have turned away from God;
they have all gone wrong; no one does what is right, not even one. Their
words are full of deadly deceit; wicked lies roll off their tongues, and
dangerous threats, like snake’s poison, from their lips; their speech is
filled with bitter curses. They are quick to hurt and kill; they leave ruin
and destruction wherever they go. They have not known the path of
peace, nor have they learned reverence for God.” Romans 3:10–18,
GNT.
Paul has a lot more to say about the consequences of mistrust in Romans
1. There (verses 18–20) Paul points out that there is no excuse to be ignorant about God. God has revealed Himself in creation and in human
experience. So lack of knowledge is actually rooted in human rebellion.
Notice some of the consequences of that rebellion:
They know God, but they do not give him the honor that belongs
to him, nor do they thank him. Instead, their thoughts have become
complete nonsense, and their empty minds are filled with darkness.
They say they are wise, but they are fools; instead of worshiping the
immortal God, they worship images made to look like mortal man or
birds or animals or reptiles. Romans 1:21–23, GNT.
We know from ancient records that the Egyptians worshiped crocodiles and even beetles. Think what that would do to a person. We’ll
look more closely at that in a later chapter. But Hosea says it is a law that
we become like the object of our worship: “When Israel came to BaalPeor, they began to worship Baal and soon became as disgusting as the
god they loved” (based on Hosea 9:10). That’s the devastating consequence of worshiping a false picture of God. Those who worship the
Father through the revelation we have in Jesus become more like Him.
Those who follow Satan become like him.
• • • • •
It is a law that we become like the object of our worship.
• • • • •
How God has tried to keep in touch, but how unwilling we have
been to listen! Because people have refused to keep in mind the true
knowledge about God (Romans 1:18–23), Paul goes on to say (Romans
1:25, GNT): “They exchange the truth about God for a lie.” And you
know who the father of lies is (John 8:44). Paul then outlines the devastating consequences of this exchange:
(God) has given them over to corrupted minds, so that they do the
things that they should not do. They are filled with all kinds of wickedness, evil, greed, and vice; they are full of jealousy, murder, fighting,
deceit, and malice. They gossip and speak evil of one another; they are
hateful to God, insolent, proud, and boastful; they think of more ways
to do evil; they disobey their parents; they have no conscience; they do
not keep their promises, and they show no kindness or pity for others.
They know that God’s law says that people who live in this way
deserve death. Yet, not only do they continue to do these very things,
but they even approve of others who do them. Romans 1:28–32, GNT.
Notice how the Bible says (to our comfort) that there will be no gossips in eternity! The saved will be those who can be trusted with the
memory of other people’s sins and still treat them with dignity and
respect. Paul also mentions people who break their promises, a translation of the Greek word for “faithless” (ESV, NIV) or “untrustworthy”
(NASB). These are all consequences of a breakdown of trust in God’s
human family.
The stubbornness and unwillingness to listen that Paul features in
Romans 1:28–32 is echoed in Hosea 4:16–17: “Israel is as obstinate as a
stubborn heifer. How can the Lord feed them now like lambs in a broad
meadow? Ephraim is wedded to idolatry, let him alone” (Phillips). When
people don’t love, trust, and admire God, “their spirit is steeped in
unfaithfulness and they know nothing of the Lord.” Hosea 5:4, Phillips.
Notice also the following selections from Hosea: “There is no honesty
nor compassion nor knowledge of God. . . . My people! Asking advice from
a piece of wood and consulting a staff for instructions!” Hosea 4:1, 12,
Phillips.
This raises a significant point, how could it be said that Israel does
not know God (see also Jeremiah 5:4; 9:3)? Who else knew God so well?
Look at all the Old Testament prophets and their marvelous pictures of
God. But the way Israel knew God in those days was not knowing God
in the special, biblical sense. That is, to know God as a friend, to even
know God intimately as a husband and a wife know each other. The
Bible says, “Adam knew Eve,” his wife (Genesis 4:1). And as a result,
they didn’t just learn each other’s names. They had a baby!
• • • • •
The saved will be those who can be trusted with the memory
of other people’s sins and still treat them with dignity and
respect.
• • • • •
Elsewhere, God says of Israel, “Thee only have I known” (Amos
3:2). He knew all the other nations. But He knew Israel in a special way.
Something similar happens at the last judgment. When disappointed
saints find that they are not acceptable in the Kingdom, they plead,
“Lord, Lord. Open unto us.” He says, “Go away. I never knew you”
(Matthew 7:21–23). He knew the hairs on their head (Matthew 10:30;
Luke 12:7), but He did not know them as friends. And friendship is the
very essence of the relationship God wishes to have with His people. If
Israel had really known God, they would have been better friends. They
would have been jealous for His reputation. And they would have been
better people themselves, like the prophets in the Old Testament who
wrote so well of God.
When we believe Satan’s lies, we don’t trust God and allow Him
to heal us. And the ultimate result of that can be found in Romans 6:23:
“Sin pays its servants: the wage is death” (Phillips). Or in the Good News
Bible: “For sin pays its wage — death” (GNT). You see, as human beings
we cannot make it on our own. Not until God breathed into man the
breath of life, did man begin to live (Genesis 2:7). We are not gods; we’re
just created beings. God hopes we won’t find that too humiliating. He
won’t rub it in. He even treats us as gods in the Psalms (82:6). He even
speaks of us as brothers of His Son (Matthew 25:40; Mark 3:34; John
20:17). But we are still created beings. It makes good sense, therefore, to
listen very closely to the One who made us. To pretend to be God was
Satan’s insane idea. And look what it’s done for him.
How God Wins Us Back to Trust
Millions of angels and men have broken faith with God. They have
shown that they cannot be trusted. But has this changed our God? Can
God still be trusted? Specifically, can God be trusted to even want us to
come back? Is God still the kind of God who can be trusted to pay any
price to win us back? That is the question that stirred the apostle Paul
when he wrote: “What if some did not have faith? Will their lack of faith
nullify God’s faithfulness? Not at all!” Romans 3:3–4 (NIV). Some versions say: “By no means” (ESV, NRV). “God forbid” (KJV). “May it
never be” (NASB). And we have the whole biblical record of all God has
done to set right what has gone wrong.
God even sent His Son to deal with sin. Look at Romans 8:3: “What
the Law could not do, because human nature was weak, God did. He condemned sin in human nature by sending his own Son, who came with a
nature like man’s sinful nature, to do away with sin” (GNT). Or as the
Jerusalem Bible puts the same sentence (Romans 8:3): “God dealt with sin
by sending his own Son.”
• • • • •
For there to be lasting peace in God’s universe, trust must
somehow be restored. Questions must be answered. Satan’s
accusations must be met.
• • • • •
What does it mean to deal with sin? It depends on what sin is. If sin
is distrust and its consequences, forgiveness alone will not heal the damage done. Forgiveness does not do away with sin. For there to be lasting
peace in God’s universe, trust must somehow be restored. Questions
must be answered. Satan’s accusations must be met. God must be seen to
be righteous, and infinitely worthy of our trust. And so Christ came to
set things right. That is why He died; a subject we’ll spend a whole
chapter considering (Chapter Eight).
Look at Paul’s explanation in Romans 5:1: “Now that we have been
put right with God through faith, we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ” (GNT). Notice the phrase “put right” or “set right.”
That’s based on the Greek verb that’s usually translated “justified” or
“being justified” (Greek: dikaioô). I love how the Good News Bible translates it, “put right.” We’ll go into this more deeply in a later chapter.
There are at least three ways of looking at what went wrong in
God’s universe as a basis for our continuing discussion (see summary at
end of chapter). And the crucial point is that God looks different in each
of these three ways. The first of these views is very widely held beyond
the bounds of Christianity. The statement of the problem goes something like this: Because we have broken God’s rules, we have offended Him.
He is very angry with us. The crucial question then becomes: What can
human beings do to appease God’s anger so that He can find it in His
heart not to destroy us, but rather forgive us and bless us once again?
There is another view that’s widely held, sometimes within the
bounds of Christianity. The statement of the problem goes something
like this: We have broken God’s rules, and thus we are in serious legal trouble. Law and justice demand that God should destroy us, or (in some versions of this view) even torture us for eternity. The crucial question then
becomes: Can anything be done to make it legally possible for God to forgive us, and not destroy us, while still being just in His own eyes and in the
eyes of the onlooking universe?
Then there’s a third view that is not so widely held on this planet,
but I believe it is the most widely held view throughout the universe.
In this view, the statement of the problem goes something like this: We
have sinned. We have allowed ourselves to be deceived by Satan’s lies. And
so we have turned away from the true God to many substitutes. And the
results have been disastrous. Left alone we all would die. The crucial question then becomes: Is there any way that Satan’s lies can be corrected? Is
there any way that the truth about God and His government can be made
crystal clear? Is there any way that unquestionable evidence can be provided, that God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to
be? Can some of us rebels be won back to trust, and so be saved and healed?
Could I ask you which one of these three views you prefer? Which
one of these gods do you prefer? Which one would you rather live with
for eternity? Or does it really make any difference?
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: Here’s a question that takes us back to the previous chapter and helps set the foundation for everything we are trying to
do in this book. “You said that the book of Revelation was especially
directed to the Christians living at the time when it was written. Can
you explain that a bit more? I have always understood, or been told, that
it has special relevance to the present day church instead. What do you
think about that?”
Graham Maxwell: It’s true, I believe the book of Revelation was
written first for the Christians of that time. They were discouraged,
wondering why the Lord had not yet come. There was heresy in the
church, opposition to leadership, and persecution. They needed the message of Revelation to point them to a larger view. They needed to know
that they were caught up in a great controversy, but that God had
already won the war.
We need it too. The book was written just as much for us as for
them. We live at a time when we are faced with many of the same problems. And we need the same insight they did. Not so much a message
about dates and events to come, interesting and helpful as that might be.
Rather, we need the major message of the book of Revelation: Look a little higher, take a larger view of things. Realize that God has already won
the war. When we understand that message, our assignment and privilege is to go out and tell people that He’s won the war, and how He has
won it. Supported by the message of Revelation, we can act more like
players on a winning team instead of so often being on the defensive.
Lou: Are you saying that the meaning for us now may be even clearer when we understand its impact back then?
Graham: It’s the same message, but from our perspective in history, it should mean even more to us. God didn’t have a message for them
and a schedule of events for us. I believe the consistent message of the
book for all readers is to look at the bigger picture. Set everything in the
context of the Great Controversy. That perspective makes everything so
much more significant. And it is a reading of Revelation that is positive
and optimistic.
Lou: I have a question regarding the beginning of the rebellion in
heaven. “Did any other angels question God before Lucifer did? If they
didn’t, why didn’t they? Is it possible that another angel will question
God again in the future? Since it happened once, why couldn’t it go on
happening?”
Graham: I don’t know of any text that suggests other angels did
what Lucifer did. The Bible only tells us a little of what happened. You
remember that John said: “If I were to record everything that Jesus said
and did, there wouldn’t be room in the world for all the books that could
be written” (John 21:25). It’s enough for us to learn of Lucifer’s questioning rebellion and the consequences. Will this ever happen again?
What about raising questions reverently? Of course, I think we’ll do that
for eternity. How else could we learn? God is not afraid of reverent questioning at all. I think He’s complimented by it. But the Bible assures us
that the kind of rebellion that arose with Lucifer will never arise again
(see Nahum 1:9). Not because our freedom has been taken away, but
because a costly basis has been established to provide us the answers we
need. Jesus will always be there in His human form to remind us of all
the answers God gave at the cross. And we’ll remember. And that will
guarantee peace for eternity. But it will not take away our freedom.
Lou: Did God give Satan a chance to repent? After all, you’ve said
that questioning God wasn’t a problem. God welcomes our questions.
How did things go too far?
Graham: Did Satan get a chance to repent? There’s no text that
says he did. But don’t you think that the God we know and trust would
give Satan ample time? Has He not always been this way? Isn’t God
unwilling that any of His children should perish (2 Peter 3:9)? According
to Peter, God is so patient that some people will wonder if He’s ever
going to come (2 Peter 3:10, see also Romans 2:4). So we have a consistent
picture of this all through the Bible. God always waits and waits, granting us every opportunity to repent.
In fact, on the authority of the prodigal son story (Luke 15:11–32),
I would say that had Satan repented, God would have fully reinstated
him into his original position. Remember that when the prodigal came
back he said, “If you’ll just let me in as a hired servant, I’d be very
pleased.” And the father said, “We don’t have any second class sons in
our family. You’re either fully home or not.” The father even gave him a
blank check at the local bank when he gave him that ring. The father was
so generous it really bothered the older brother. So I would say that if
Satan had repented, the God of the prodigal son story would have taken
him back and fully reinstated him.
Lou: In the previous chapter you mentioned Ephesians 3:9–10.
There it tells us that “through the church, the manifold wisdom of God
might be made manifest in heavenly places.” What is the meaning of the
word “church” here? Does that mean an official church organization like
a denomination?
Graham: The word “church” has many meanings, doesn’t it? We
talk about church buildings or refer to specific denominations. We may
ask, Does the church permit thus and so? For many, “church” is the 11
o’clock hour, the worship service. So the word “church” has many
meanings. What does it mean here? The original word (ekklēsia) means
“called out,” suggesting “those who respond to God’s invitation.” It’s
almost like “congregation,” an English word that means “gather
together.” Or “synagogue,” from a Greek word for “gather together.”
The “church” in Ephesians is all who have responded to God’s invitation and at least profess that they are His friends. Paul was a member
of this church. Jeremiah was a member of this church. We can all be members of this group of individuals who say “yes” to God, who respond to
His call. We still need lots of work, lots of discipline, lots of correction,
lots of healing. But at the same time, we have the privilege of joining
with Him in spreading the good news as to what He is like. And it is
through the church, and His treatment of the church, that God has
revealed His purposes and plans. The “church” in Ephesians is certainly
more than a single denomination.
Lou: Here is a question we discussed in the previous chapter, but
perhaps we ought to touch on it again. “If God knew that Lucifer would
be such an instigator of trouble upon the human race, why did He create
him?” I think this is a question that baffles many.
Graham: As we touched on in the previous chapter, I don’t like to
limit God’s foreknowledge. So I like to believe that when God created
Lucifer, He knew that Lucifer would cause all the trouble. But God also
knew what He would do about it. So as He created this magnificent person, He said, “I know this is going to cost Me, and I’m willing to pay.”
And I think that is truly wonderful, that He would go ahead, knowing
that Lucifer would one day cause all the trouble.
Does that make God responsible for sin, then? No. God has never
created anybody imperfect. Lucifer had no bent to evil whatever. He
allowed pride and then sin to rise up in himself. God created him perfect,
but He also created him free. And this is important. It means that when
we say we love God, it isn’t because we’re programmed that way, it is a
free choice. But that freedom means we can also choose to rebel. We can
also say to God, “We hate You.” Adam and Eve demonstrated that. When
they sinned in the garden it was because they were free to sin.
Lou: That means Satan didn’t go wrong because of some malfunction in the way he was made, like an automobile that has to be recalled.
He was perfect. But with that perfect freedom to make choices, all kinds
of consequences were possible.
Graham: Yes. But God is in no way responsible. In fact, that leads
me to something really wonderful about God. He has paid the price for
this rebellion as if it were His fault. He has assumed the responsibility,
even though it was not His fault. I think it’s because freedom means so
much to God, He would rather go this costly way. He would rather not
take some shortcut and program us so we would all behave, like robots.
We could have been programmed to line up and say how much we loved
Him. It would be like listening to a recording or watching a video with
actors pretending to love someone. And that wouldn’t please our intelligent God.
Lou: Why do you feel that the tree in the midst of the garden was
the only place Satan could tempt Eve? And how was God’s commandment not to eat of this tree protective?
Graham: It’s true that there’s no text that says Satan could only
approach Adam and Eve at the tree. But if you had been the Devil,
which tree would you have chosen? Wouldn’t you have gone to The
Tree of Life? But Satan never met them at The Tree of Life. He only met
them at the tree where they were not supposed to go. So apparently he
was limited to that one tree. And he knew they had been told not to go
there. So I’ve connected two facts together: 1) God only warned them
about that particular tree, and 2) that’s exactly where Satan met them.
So he didn’t have free access to the entire garden. That means the tree
was put there to protect Adam and Eve. Satan’s freedom to tempt was
limited to that tree. I think that’s the only logical inference.
Lou: This next question ties in a bit with that. “Does evil exist in
order to allow human beings to be able to choose between good and bad,
to use our own judgment?” That sounds like evil is something good
because it gives us a chance to grow. What do you think of that?
Graham: Fortunately, Paul dealt with that in a very potent way. In
a sense it is true, the more evil we have been, the more gracious God has
been to us. And so Paul says: “Why don’t we be a little more evil then,
so He’ll look more gracious?” Romans 3:8, 6:2. Paul raises the idea twice
and then condemns it twice as a terrible thought! Romans 3:7–8, 6:1–2.
It is true, the worse we have behaved, the more graciously God has
stooped to meet us and love us and treat us so graciously. Well, if the
blacker the backdrop the more brilliant God’s righteousness appears,
why don’t we paint Him a blacker backdrop? Paul says that’s a terrible
thought. In fact, in Phillips’ translation it says “What a ghastly [emphasis supplied] thought.”
So I don’t think we should suggest that our sinfulness and our evil
has helped God. Rather, He has taken an emergency and turned it into
something good. He’s the only one that looks good in this. Let’s not
think we are serving Him by being a little more wicked so that He can
show how good He is. We’ve been bad enough without trying.
Lou: All right, here’s another question. “If a person is sincere about
religious things but sincerely wrong, whose fault is that?” And I suppose
implicit behind the question is, “What will happen as a result? Will the
person be punished or suffer consequences from that?”
Graham: I like that question and what it implies. I do believe that
if one sincerely takes the wrong path, one will sincerely arrive at the
wrong destination. That’s true.
Lou: So whose fault is it then?
Graham: Keep in mind that if we are truly sincere; if we’re really
willing to listen, God has not left us in the dark. As John says, Christ is
the light that enlightens everyone who comes into this world (John 1:9).
Paul even says that there are Gentiles who know nothing about the Bible,
who know nothing about God’s law and instructions. But they do by
nature the things that the law requires, and they show that the law has
been written on their hearts (Romans 2:13–16). And I love the paragraph
in Desire of Ages that tells about heathen who worship God ignorantly;
the message was never brought to them by human instrumentality.
Instead, they’ve heard the voice of God speaking to them in nature. Ellen
G. White, Desire of Ages, 638. They’ve done what the law requires,
which is love. And they’re recognized as God’s children. God is not
going to abandon anyone on this planet who is sincerely and humbly
willing to listen. He will not leave them in the dark.
• • • • •
If one sincerely takes the wrong path, one will sincerely
arrive at the wrong destination.
• • • • •
Now it’s a great privilege to be the one who gets there with the
good news, but sometimes somebody else gets there first. Think of missionaries who have been shipwrecked as they’re about to arrive on an
island to somehow “turn those cannibals into Christians.” As they’re
drowning out there by the reef, here come these cannibals paddling their
canoe. So the missionaries say farewell to each other; they know what’s
going to happen shortly. But instead, the cannibals put them in their
canoe and take them to the beach and revive them. When they are finally
comfortable the missionary says, “Let’s assemble these people and give
them the truth.” And he starts to preach to them about love.
His missionary wife nudges him and says, “Wait a minute. These
people risked their lives to rescue us from the reef!” The minister replies,
“But nobody’s preached to them yet.” He forgot Romans 2:13–16. The
Spirit of God was there before the missionaries came. God has always
approached people “in many and various ways” (Hebrews 1:1). So I
would say that if one is really sincere, one will not wind up sincerely
wrong. If one is “sincerely wrong,” one has probably been saying “no”
to truth for a long time. True sincerity is open to evidence and open to
correction. True sincerity is humble. False sincerity is often simply lazy.
Lou: This question also concerns the previous chapter. “Could you
explain the text ‘without the shedding of blood there is no remission of
sin’ (Hebrews 9:22)? Is the word ‘remission’ here used with a different
meaning than the common medical interpretation that an illness is not
cured or gone, but is simply in a state of inactivity without symptoms?
I’d hate to think that Christ’s shed blood only ‘inactivates’ the rebellion, but doesn’t really cure it.”
• • • • •
True sincerity is open to evidence and open to correction.
True sincerity is humble. False sincerity is often simply lazy.
• • • • •
Graham: That question is a sermon in itself. On the matter of
“without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sin,” that will be
covered in the chapter on why Jesus had to die (Chapter Eight). But I’d
like to comment on the second half of the question, the remission of sin.
“Remission” in the Bible is not a medical term. If sin were only remitted,
we would be in a sorry state and our infections would get into the hereafter. And our rebellions would continue.
The actual word translated in some English Bibles as “remission”
means forgiveness. According to Hebrews 9:22, God actually sent His
Son to “forgive” sin. The best translation is really “without the shedding of blood there’s no forgiveness.” But God sent His Son to do even
more than that, Jesus came to do away with sin (Hebrews 9:26, NIV).
God is not through with sin until it has been eliminated. But these texts
do raise the question, why is blood necessary? And that we will treat most
seriously in a later chapter.
Lou: I’d like to return to a question we talked a little about in the
previous chapter. “If we say that God has already won the war, why are
we still here? What is God waiting for? Shouldn’t the war be over?”
Graham: We have a whole chapter on what God is waiting for
(Chapter Eighteen). But since it came up here, it would be good to
address it briefly now. When Satan and his followers were cast out of
heaven, there was victory of a sort, but not much of one. There were so
many questions yet to be resolved. Peace had not been confirmed. Even
the loyal angels had their questions. Getting sin out of heaven might
seem “the real victory.” But it was no victory for our heavenly Father. It
was only when Jesus died that it could be said, “It is finished.” John
19:30.
When Jesus returned to heaven on resurrection Sunday, He found
the universe celebrating that He really had won the war. In the book of
Revelation, the heavenly throng says over and over again, “You’ve
shown Yourself to be merciful and just and good and righteous and holy”
(see Revelation 5:12–13, 15:3–4, 19:2). “You have the victory” (see
Revelation 3:21, 5:5–6)! So in a real sense the war was won then, in the
death and resurrection of Jesus. The angels and the inhabitants of other
worlds have paid such close attention to what Jesus revealed in His life,
teachings, suffering and death that they got the message. And they
couldn’t wait to tell Him on resurrection Sunday, “You’ve won our loyalty. As far as we’re concerned, You have won the war.”
Unfortunately back on this planet we didn’t get the message. Jesus
invited three of the disciples to watch some of the evidence in
Gethsemane. And the brethren slept through it all (Matthew 26:36–46;
Mark 14:32–42; Luke 22:41–46)! He repeatedly invited them to come to
the cross, and see the most important answer of all (Matthew 16:21,
17:22, 20:19; Mark 8:31, 9:12, 31, 10:34; Luke 9:22, 17:25, 18:32–33, 24:7).
The universe watched. But where were “the brethren,” as He called
them? Eleven of them were elsewhere. Only one of them was there. And
that’s why John was the disciple who wrote the most significant things
about why Jesus had to die.
So God has been mercifully waiting for this one tiny planet of people to make up their minds (2 Peter 3:9). We know there are awesome
events to take place here before Jesus comes. And until we are as settled
into the truth as the angels are, God will not let the closing events come.
He puts them off, and He mercifully waits. That is what God is like. He
gives His people all the time they need to become settled into the truth
about His character. God waits until His people understand. You can
trust a God like that!
Lou: But Graham, doesn’t the Bible speak often about the wrath of
God? Can you really trust someone who is angry a lot?
Graham: We will have more to say on that in the chapter on why
Jesus had to die (Chapter Eight). For now let me just say that if you take
all sixty-six books of the Bible and look at the references to God’s wrath
all the way through, you’ll find so many places that explain God’s wrath
as simply God’s turning away in loving disappointment from those who
do not want Him anyway, thus leaving them to the inevitable and awful
consequences of their own rebellious choices. God’s anger is not like our
anger. And we will have a lot more to say about that later.
Lou: Could you say a word or two to introduce the chapter which
follows? What is the next topic?
Graham: The next topic is “All God Asks Is Trust.” The basic
point of that chapter is that God can and will save all who trust Him.
When it comes to salvation there are no limits on the part of God. He
can readily heal the damage done. The crucial issue is whether or not we
will trust Him enough to stand humbly and teachably in His presence
and ask, “What must we do to be saved? What must we do to be well?”
The problem is not with our Creator, the problem is with us.
Lou: It seems to me that in this chapter, Graham, you have emphasized that problem. We need to understand the problem before we can
fully understand the solution. In a sense, everything hangs upon how we
understand the nature of this sin problem. And in the next chapter we
will talk more about the solution.
Graham: Very much so. A correct understanding of sin will make
a big difference as we continue our conversations about God.
• • • • •
Statement of the Problem:
There are at least three differing views of what went wrong in God’s
universe:
1) Because we have broken God’s rules, we have offended Him and He
is very angry with us.
2) Because we have broken God’s rules, we are in serious legal trouble. Law and justice demand that God should destroy us or even torture
us for eternity.
3) Because we have sinned and allowed ourselves to be deceived by
Satan’s lies, we have turned away from the true God to many substitutes. Left alone we all would die.
• • • • •
