Chapter Seven
The Question of Authority
The Great Controversy is not over who has the greater power, God or
the adversary. Satan has never accused God of lacking physical power. In
fact, the book of James says that whenever Satan thinks of the power of
the One who created the whole vast universe, he trembles with fear
(James 2:19). And he knows he has but a short time (Revelation 12:12).
Satan has not accused God of being weak, he has accused Him of abusing
His divine power and failing to tell the truth. Specifically, as we have
reviewed several times, God has been accused of being arbitrary in His
use of power; of being exacting and vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. If
those charges were true, then surely it would not be safe to trust in God.
Who would want to spend eternity with such a Deity?
• • • • •
God has been accused of being arbitrary in His use of
power; of being exacting and vengeful, unforgiving, and
severe. If those charges were true, then surely it would not be
safe to trust in God.
• • • • •
And yet one-third of the brilliant angels, intelligent as they are,
have agreed that Satan is right. They agree that God has indeed abused
His power and is not worthy of their trust or ours. For thousands of
years they have worked to convince us of the rightness of their charges.
Just as God has sought to demonstrate that He is not the kind of person
His enemies have made Him out to be, so Satan in many and various ways
has sought to twist and pervert the truth in support of his cause. Most
diabolically, I believe, Satan has used the teachings of religion and even
of Christianity to support his case. He has even perverted the meaning
of the cross in support of his accusation that God demands our obedience
under threat of painful execution.
“Love Me or I’ll kill you,” is his satanic perversion of God’s warning in the beginning: “Children, I don’t want you to die. If you go your
own rebellious, disorderly way, you will die.” Consider the extensive
damage caused by Satan’s devilish caricature of God’s words in the
Garden of Eden. If God has really said, “Love Me or I’ll torture you for
eternity in sulfurous flames,” how could there be any real love? How
could there be any real trust? I wonder how many millions have been
turned against God by that perversion of the truth. Or worse, I wonder
how many people have found it possible to accept that picture of God
and still try to serve Him. They offer Him the obedience that springs
from fear, and then suffer the destructive consequences of forced submission.
• • • • •
The good news, of course, is that God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be. The whole Bible
presents a refutation of Satan’s charges, not based on mere
claims, but rather on the evidence of demonstration.
• • • • •
The good news, of course, is that God is not the kind of person His
enemies have made Him out to be. The whole Bible presents a refutation
of these charges, not based on mere claims, but rather on the evidence of
demonstration. The whole Bible demonstrates God’s way of exercising
authority and power. I think that is very good news which leads us to
repentance and to trust. Understanding the way God runs His universe
will keep it secure and free and at peace for the rest of eternity.
The Importance of the Topic
Some of us believe that this understanding of how God exercises
His authority and power is the most important of all Christian beliefs.
Every other Christian doctrine derives its importance, and even its
meaning, from this essential truth about our God. To some of us, the
most important information we have to share with our fellow human
beings around this planet is the truth about the way God runs His universe and what He wants of His children. We need to share this more
urgently than ever before as we face the closing events of human history.
Before Christ returns, the Bible describes a time of confusion and deception such as the world has never seen.
This time of confusion will lead up to Satan’s final attempt to win
the whole world to worship and trust him. Revelation 13 says that when
Satan’s campaign is over, the whole world will be worshiping him,
except those few who have not been deceived (Revelation 13:8). So it
should not surprise us, if we are as near the End as we believe we are,
that we find ourselves surrounded on all sides by conflicting claims to
religious authority. Certainly the development of modern media has
made us more aware of this than ever before. As we see and listen to all
these conflicting claims, notice how often they are supported by position,
power, miracles, or claims of special communications from the Lord.
How Satan would enjoy it if he could turn God’s friends on this
planet against their heavenly Father! Or even more seriously, how he
would love to deceive God’s professing, commandment-keeping people.
Such a deception within the “remnant” itself would be the most destructive of all. No wonder Paul said in Ephesians that we should grow up and
not be so easily swayed to and fro by every wind of doctrine (Ephesians
4:14). Then in Hebrews he says we should grow up and have our faculties
trained to distinguish between good and evil, right and wrong (Hebrews
5:14). But the crucial question is: How do we train our faculties by practice, so as not to be deceived by conflicting claims to religious authority,
particularly the claims of the adversary? And at the same time, how can
we become more sensitive to the voice of true authority?
How God Makes His Case
 The question here is about authority. When we know how God
exercises His authority and power, we will be better able to recognize
Satan’s counterfeit. What does God want of us? Has He ever said to His
children, “You either love Me or I’ll have to kill you”? Did He ever say
that? What about Satan’s charges that God is arbitrary, vengeful, and
severe? Has God convincingly answered those accusations? How do we
know if we are being told the truth? How does God seek to convince us
of the rightness of His cause? In comparison, how does Satan seek to convince us of the rightness of his cause? Which method do we prefer?
Which method do we find more convincing and more trustworthy?
Under whose government would we rather live?
• • • • •
When we know how God exercises His authority and power,
we will be better able to recognize Satan’s counterfeit.
• • • • •
How do we settle these questions? Should we pick up our Bibles
and begin to read God’s claims about Himself? You won’t find encouragement for that in the Bible. God Himself warns us, with many scriptural examples, not to accept mere claims. In Deuteronomy 13 and 1
Kings 13 there were prophets who claimed to be prophets but who were
lying. There were people who performed miracles, but at the same time
they were not telling the truth. There are many other warnings in the
Bible — remember the four hundred and fifty lying prophets of King
Ahab (1 Kings 18:19, 22), and the lying prophets in the days of Jeremiah
(particularly chapters 26–29). God has been very candid in warning us,
“Don’t accept mere claims.” What we need is evidence and demonstration.
• • • • •
Satan cannot use the method of open investigation and
inquiry. He would lose his case if he did. He doesn’t dare
invite our questions, for the truth is not with him.
• • • • •
So when God was accused of being unworthy of the trust of His
family, He humbly took His case into court. This is amazing! He’s the
Infinite One. Yet He invites His children to investigate and to discover
to their own satisfaction whether God is worthy of their trust. Imagine
the Infinite One submitting His character and government to the scrutiny of His own creatures! Does that say something to us about God? Paul
says in Romans: “God, may You win Your case when You take it into
court” (based on Romans 3:4).
Has God already won His case? Of course He has, throughout the
rest of the universe. It is only down here that some of us are not too sure.
God didn’t win His case by bribing the judge, or by intimidating the
jury, or by hiding some of the evidence. He proved to the satisfaction of
the whole onlooking universe that the truth, the evidence, was on His
side. What evidence did He offer? The most costly and convincing evidence the universe will ever see or ever need. That will be the subject
of our next chapter.
How Satan Makes His Case
Satan, on the other hand, cannot use the method of open investigation and inquiry. He would lose his case if he did. He doesn’t dare invite
our questions, for the truth is not with him. And so, throughout history, he has used religion to silence inquiry. And then, diabolically, he
calls that willingness to believe without inquiry faith. Instead of evidence and truth, he substitutes force, fear, and ignorance. On top of that
he piles miracles, excitement, feelings, pomp, majesty, ceremony, and
mystery. And then on top of all that he piles claim upon claim. In light
of all these things, we must be on guard lest we be deceived. Let’s not
underestimate his cunning. He deceived one-third of the brilliant angels.
Of course, if we read the sixty-six books through, we will realize
how often we have been warned to beware of such things. Jesus Himself
warns specifically of Satan’s methods, in the familiar words of Matthew:
If anyone says to you then, “Look, here is Christ!” or “There He
is!” don’t believe it. False Christs and false prophets are going to
appear and will produce great signs and wonders to mislead, if it were
possible, even God’s own people! Matthew 24:23–24, Phillips.
Also, a little earlier in the same chapter Jesus says:
Watch out, and do not let anyone fool you. Many men, claiming
to speak for me, will come and say, “I am the Messiah!” and they will
fool many people. Matthew 24:4–5, GNT.
The most unusual Bible in my whole collection is The New
Testament of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, as Revised and
Corrected by the Spirits. It is the Spiritists’ Bible. It came out in 1861.
It thoroughly rewrites the New Testament in support of Spiritism. In
the Introduction, it claims that Jesus came down from heaven, medium
that He was, and the apostles came down with Him, and they corrected
all the errors in the New Testament. And then it says, “Dear Reader,
trust in God, who made all things after the counsel of His own will. The
Holy Spirits feel much interest in this work, and the spirits who corrected it desire that the world will receive this correction as coming from
them, directed by God Himself, which is true. Signed, Jesus, the
Christ.” A diabolical fraud! But look at the claim. Anybody can make
claims.
In the book of Revelation John warns concerning the use of miracles
to deceive:
This second beast performed great miracles; it made fire come
down out of heaven to earth in the sight of everyone. And it deceived
all the people living on earth by means of the miracles which it was
allowed to perform. Revelation 13:13–14, GNT.
Speaking of that last period of human history, Paul gives the same
type of warning in 2 Thessalonians:
The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with the work
of Satan displayed in all kinds of counterfeit miracles, signs and wonders, and in every sort of evil that deceives those who are perishing.
They perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved. 2
Thessalonians 2:9–10, NIV.
They refuse the very thing God designed to protect them from deception. But most seriously of all, Paul warns that professed messengers of
God will also be engaged in this work of deception:
God’s messengers? They are counterfeits of the real thing, dishonest practitioners masquerading as the messengers of Christ. Nor
do their tactics surprise me when I consider how Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light. It is only to be expected that his angels
will have the appearance of ministers of righteousness. . . . 2
Corinthians 11:13–15, Phillips.
Paul’s reference to Satan suggests that the Devil is still pretending
to be Lucifer, the bearer of light and truth. This reminds us of Christ’s
most serious words, spoken to a group of Sabbath-keeping, tithe-paying
Bible teachers in His day. These Bible teachers had just denounced
Jesus’ picture of His Father as satanic (John 8:48). Think of it! Very
devout Sabbath-keepers, tithe-payers and Bible teachers were telling
Christ He had a devil. And He turned to them, with tears in His voice,
I’m sure, and uttered those extraordinary words:
The father whose sons you are is the devil, and you are bent on
carrying out the wishes of your father. He proved himself a murderer
at the very beginning, and did not loyally stand by the truth; in fact,
there is no spark of truth in him. Whenever he gives utterance to his
falsehood, then he gives expression to his real character; for he is a liar
and the father of lies. I, on the contrary, speak the truth, and therefore
you do not believe me. John 8:44–45, Kleist and Lilly.
Paul mentions forged letters being circulated, pretending to be from
him and causing early Christians much distress:
We ask you, brothers, not to become easily unsettled or
alarmed by some prophecy, report or letter supposed to have come
from us. . . . Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way. . . . 2
Thessalonians 2:1–3, NIV.
From that time on Paul signed his epistles with greater care.
John also warns of false teachers who will arise, claiming to have the
Holy Spirit, and yet their claim is a fraud:
My dear friends, do not believe all who claim to have the Spirit,
but test them to find out if the spirit they have comes from God. For
many false prophets have gone out everywhere. 1 John 4:1–2, GNT.
Claims alone are no proof of the Spirit. Paul surely agrees that we
should test everything before believing: “Test everything. Hold on to
the good.” 1 Thessalonians 5:21, NIV. God is not afraid to be tested.
That’s what is so believable about God. The reason He is not afraid to
be examined is that the truth and evidence are on His side.
The Authority of Jesus Christ
Because truth and evidence were on Christ’s side, He spoke with
great authority: “When Jesus had finished saying these things, the
crowds were amazed at his teaching, because he taught as one who had
authority. . . .” Matthew 7:28–29, NIV. Luke adds: “His message had
authority.” Luke 4:32, NIV. Where did Jesus’ authority come from?
How can we recognize the voice of true authority?
Did Jesus base His authority on His claims? No, He is the One who
inspired the warning against accepting mere claims (1 John 4:1–2). When
John inquired if He really was the Messiah, Jesus didn’t just say, “Yes,
I am.” He offered evidence to John (Matthew 11:4–6). Did He base His
authority on miracles or a show of power? No, it was Jesus who inspired
the warning, “Don’t trust miracles if they are not associated with the
truth” (based on Deuteronomy 13:1–3). In fact, He even turned the
crowds away when they were following Him because of the miraculous
food and the miraculous healings (Matthew 14:22; Mark 6:45; John 6:15).
How Jesus must have been tempted to use His power when He was winning so few! He knew the people were expecting a Messiah who would
come with great physical power to drive off their enemies and establish
an earthly kingdom. But He wouldn’t do it. It would have misrepresented the truth about God’s way of exercising His authority.
Did Jesus base His authority on His loud voice and bombastic manner, as is so customary of many evangelists today? Just read the Gospels.
The people marveled at the gracious words that came from His lips.
“Blessed are the humble in spirit. . . . Blessed are the meek.” Matthew 5:3,
5. You simply cannot shout those words. People who shout don’t teach
things like that. Christ’s manner of speaking must have been as music to
His audiences.
Was His authority based on a dazzling display of who He really
was? He really was the Son of God, the Creator of the Universe, worshiped by all the angels. Yet on the road to Emmaus, He didn’t reveal
who He was until He had led them through the Scriptures and until
their decision was based on evidence, not on His authority as a person
(Luke 24:13–35). Note the marvelous understanding of the Emmaus road
experience in the following:
Jesus did not first reveal himself in his true character to them,
and then open the Scriptures to their minds; . . .
He maintained his disguise till he had interpreted the
Scriptures, and had led them to an intelligent faith in his life, his
character, his mission to earth, and his death and resurrection. He
wished the truth to take firm root in their minds, not because it
was supported by his personal testimony [emphasis supplied],
but because the typical law, and the prophets of the Old
Testament, agreeing with the facts of his life and death, presented
unquestionable evidence of that truth. When the object of his
labors with the two disciples was gained, he revealed himself to
them. . . . Ellen G. White, Spirit of Prophecy, vol. 3, 214.
You see, Jesus spoke with authority because He always told the
truth. And some of those who heard Him also perceived it to be true. To
them He spoke with great authority. But He did not speak to everyone
with authority. Some said He had a devil, because of the way He presented His Father (John 8:48). But Jesus spoke with authority to everyone who recognized that His words were in full harmony with the truth
revealed in God’s Word. And when John the Baptist received the report
of what Jesus was saying and doing, I suspect he said, “That fits Isaiah
perfectly. Yes, He is the One” (based on Luke 7:22, cf. Isaiah 35:6; 61:1–
3).
The ultimate authority, then, is the truth. It is God’s only means
of persuasion, the only safe basis for our trust. In many and various ways,
God has revealed the truth to us and then has invited our questions and
our examination of Him. For three and a half years God lived among
us to demonstrate His way of using and exercising authority and
power. As a result, many people despised Him as weak, just as the Old
Testament had predicted they would (Isaiah 53:2–4). They were looking
for someone who would lead them mightily against their enemies. They
wanted miracles. They wanted free food and free healing. They didn’t
want the kind of person the real Messiah proved to be. Nor did they like
His picture of the Father.
Some people, however, respected Him. They recognized gentle
Jesus as the supreme authority. I think that’s why Jesus said in the
Sermon on the Mount: “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth.” Matthew 5:5. Because, you see, only the meek, only the gentle,
would be safe to admit to the Kingdom, the kind of kingdom that will
be governed the way Jesus exercised His authority and power during
those three and a half years.
• • • • •
For three and a half years God lived among us to demonstrate His way of using and exercising authority and power.
• • • • •
Or do you think He will act differently in the hereafter? It’s true,
He thundered many times in the Old Testament, but those were all
emergency measures. For three and a half precious years, He finally got
to run His kingdom on this planet the way He will do it in eternity. It
didn’t work, did it? Well, it worked for a few. It worked with the meek.
They loved it. And the poor people heard Him gladly. But most people
did not appreciate this kind of government.
Which raises the question – which kind of government do we prefer? Under which kind of government do we feel most secure; a powerful tyranny, or the gentle exercise of authority and power that Jesus
demonstrated for three and a half years? Obviously, it would be unsafe
to admit people into eternity who do not respect the authority of truth
spoken softly in love. Blessed indeed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth (Matthew 5:5).
I prefer a God who is infinitely powerful, to be sure, but an equally
gracious person who values nothing higher than the freedom, dignity,
and individuality of His intelligent creatures. With that kind of God, our
love, our trust, our worship, and our willingness to listen and obey, may
be freely given. It would be a pleasure to live with a God like that. That
is the quality of life in the hereafter that has been reserved for us. We
can throw it away if we wish, or we can be convinced by the evidence
that this is the kind of person our God really is. We can find Him worthy
of our trust. Personally, I am convinced that God has more than amply
demonstrated that He is precisely the kind of a God He claims to be.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: Earlier you mentioned how God’s response to the
Great Controversy was not a great show of power or force; you said He
took His case into court. I wonder if you might explain just a bit more
what you meant by the word “court.”
Graham Maxwell: It is an absolutely magnificent verse in Romans
3:4. Sometimes it’s translated: “You [God] must be shown to be right
when you speak; you must win your case when you are being tried”
(TEV). And the verse is so crucial in understanding why Jesus had to
die, that in the next chapter we will look at that verse in a number of
versions. Now I deliberately chose the translation that I used. The closest to the meaning of the verse is the translation by Goodspeed, although
I modify that slightly. “God, may You win Your case when You take it
into court” just rings a bell with me; it fits there. What court is this? It
is the court of the universe.
Lou: Oh, that does answer what I was wondering. By “court” you
mean the entire universe. Could we say that we are included in that
court, too?
Graham: Very much. And I would want to use many passages in
Scripture that speak of God taking His case into court. Look at the gathering in Daniel 7, when a hundred million angels are watching. Or in Job
1 and 2, where God conducts a conversation with the adversary about
His friend, Job. There are many references to this in Scripture.
Lou: Our subject in this chapter raises many questions that have
come up in the past, and I would like to press some of these. You talk
about God establishing the authority of truth and trust and love, but
didn’t God, in fact, use force and power? Isn’t the Old Testament
record filled with incidents that would support the idea that God was
putting on a show to intimidate us?
Graham: There’s no question! That’s what always astounds people
who have never read the sixty-six books through before. Innumerable
times God is pictured as showing His physical force and power. I don’t
think He ever did it to win anybody. In fact, I don’t think He ever won
anybody that way. He often did it simply to get their attention. Or at the
time of the Flood, He did it in order to maintain His contact with the
human race. But if it puzzles us, how it must delight the adversary to
have this information to use! I think the Devil is puzzled that God would
hand him so much evidence in support of his accusations.
Lou: Let’s look at a specific instance. Here is Saul of Tarsus (Paul)
on his way to Damascus, and you’ve already referred to how he misunderstood Jesus. But here he is on the way. And Acts says that a great
light flashed from heaven and he fell to the ground (Acts 9:3–4). That’s a
very impressive use of force or power. Didn’t it win Saul?
Graham: No, it just floored him. But it got his attention. And I
would judge, with a man like Saul, nothing less would have gotten his
attention, as he was quite a firebrand. Already he was quite tormented
within because of the behavior of Stephen. When Stephen said, “Lay this
not to their charge (Acts 7:60),” he must have remembered the report
that when that Heretic died on the cross He said, “Father, forgive them
(Luke 23:34).” And Saul knew his Old Testament well; he knew that this
was ideal, God-like behavior (Exodus 34:6–7).
In order to stifle the prickings of his conscience, he went out to conduct another “evangelistic” effort. So God floored him on the Damascus
road, and got his attention. But then notice what God did once He had
his attention (Acts 9:4–6, 10–19). He just said, “Saul, you’re having trouble with your conscience, aren’t you?”
And Saul said, “Yes, I really am.”
“Then why don’t you give in?”
“I give in. What do You want me to do?”
And Christ didn’t say, “I want you to do the following, and be sure
you do it or else.” No, the Lord said, “Your way is to overwhelm people.
Mine is for you to go and talk to Ananias, one of your peers. That’s all
I’m going to say.” And from then on, Saul/Paul never pressured anybody. He said, “If you disagree with me, well — let everyone be fully
persuaded in his own mind” (based on Romans 14:5).
Before the incident on the Damascus road, Paul put Christians in
prison or had them stoned (Acts 8:1–3; 9:1–2). Afterward he realized that
persuasion can only really come when, in the highest sense of freedom,
you yourself become convinced; and he adopted that method. Now he
truly knew God. He didn’t change his diet, his Sabbath, his dress, his
Bible, or even the name of his God. He changed his picture of God. But
he wouldn’t have done it if God had not hit him with a two-by-four on
the Damascus road.
Lou: So the show of force on the Damascus road was to get Saul’s
attention. It fulfilled a function.
Graham: Well, we know from experience with children, you sometimes have to do this.
Lou: But what about some other instances in the Old Testament?
Let’s go back to Mount Carmel and Elijah. What about the fire that
comes down, burns up the sacrifice and even the stones, and licks up the
water in the trench (1 Kings 18:38–39). That’s pretty dramatic.
Graham: Now that’s a classic case because it’s so dramatic, the fire
consuming everything. I remember as a boy thinking of the stones burning and the water being lapped up. It’s significant, though, that when all
the excitement dies down, Elijah himself is depressed (1 Kings 19:4). The
impact of dramatic events doesn’t last long, it doesn’t have staying
power. And so Elijah ran away and hid in a cave. Then his spirits rose
again when he felt the earthquake, and he heard the wind, and he saw
the fire, and he thought God was approaching. So it’s very significant
that the Bible says God was not in the wind, He was not in the earthquake, and He was not in the fire. After these things came the sound of
a small silence, “the still small voice” (1 Kings 19:11–12). And Elijah was
informed that that was the sound of God approaching. God is willing to
use dramatic means when the circumstances call for it. But when He has
a friend, there is no more wind, earthquake, and fire. Just the still, small
voice of truth. And I’m impressed that soon after that Elijah was ready
to be translated to heaven.
Lou: Does that same principle provide answers for some of the
other stories that people have raised questions about?
Graham: There are stories like that seemingly without number. If
this picture didn’t fit consistently, I wouldn’t find it very believable.
Lou: Well, what about the plagues of Egypt then? Think of the tension there! Isn’t judgment involved?
Graham: Yes, among other things. When God speaks or acts He is
usually saying several things at once with great skill. The Israelites themselves were tempted not to trust God, because in those days you measured your god by success on the battlefield or by personal and national
prosperity. What kind of a god would be the god of a people in captivity? Meanwhile, the Egyptians thought their gods were stronger,
because they had tyrannized the Israelites and their God. So the plagues
came. Certainly it encouraged the Israelites to believe that maybe God
could do something for them after all. As for the Egyptians, many of the
plagues were directed toward their deities. So Exodus itself says that
God was judging the gods of Egypt (Exodus 12:12). Through the plagues
He was demonstrating the weakness of the gods there. So God encouraged the beginning of Israel’s trust with a show of power. We often need
to be convinced that He’s infinitely powerful before we will be willing
to listen to Him and follow Him, even when He speaks in a still, small
voice. But why does God take so long to move from the thunder to the
silence? Because some people prefer thunder all their lives.
Lou: People are asking about Uzzah, the one who was so anxious to
support the Ark when it was starting to fall off the cart. And he dies at
that point (2 Samuel 6:2–7). So God wasn’t doing it to get his attention!
His life was over.
• • • • •
Why does God take so long to move from the thunder to the
silence? Because some people prefer thunder.
• • • • •
Graham: That’s right, Uzzah’s dead. And where Uzzah will be in
the hereafter is between him and God. Some like to think perhaps he
repented at that moment. We don’t know and we don’t need to know.
But it’s quite a story when you put it in its total setting. Why was the
Ark on the cart in the first place? Because the sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas, had been such poor representatives of the truth. They were
even assaulting women who came to worship in the temple (1 Samuel
2:22–25). They were that wicked. So then when Israel was drawn into
battle, they thought, “Let’s take that magic box with us” (1 Samuel 4:3–
4). They had no reverence for God, but they thought the magic box
might help. So they took it into battle and they lost it. And in due course
of time the Ark wound up in front of Dagon the fish god.
God then worked with these heathen Philistines the same way He
worked with the Egyptians. In the morning, when the priests went in to
conduct their worship of Dagon the fish god, they found him toppled off
his pedestal in front of the Ark (1 Samuel 5:3). Well, they didn’t dare tell
anybody, so they propped him up and then said their prayers: “Oh
almighty one, bless us this day.” The next day when they came in, Dagon
had not only fallen off the pedestal, but he had broken into several pieces
(1 Samuel 5:4). So they hastily glued him together, put him back on the
pedestal, and prayed, “Almighty one, look after us this day.”
I can imagine some small child saying, “How come we’re praying to
the almighty one whom we’ve just glued together?” And so they consulted the theologians of the day. It’s all detailed in 1 Samuel 5. And the
theologians said, “We advise that you send that box back, and we suggest you put some gifts in it. Remember what the God of this box did to
the Egyptians and remember how Pharaoh hardened his own heart?” 1
Samuel 6:1–7. They’ve got it right there, “Pharaoh hardened his own
heart.” These heathen theologians did better than some of us today.
Well, as the story proceeded, it was on the cart coming home, and
Uzzah lived in a family that knew better than to treat the Ark with such
disrespect (2 Samuel 6:2–7). It was an act of irreverence, like how they
lost the Ark in the first place. Where there is no reverence, there is no
listening to God. Where there is no listening, there is no help and all is
lost. So when we’re our most irreverent, God runs the risk of being the
most dramatic, to see if He can inspire a little respect. And the Devil,
I’m sure, mocked Him for doing it.
Now David was very angry when Uzzah died. He was so angry
that he left the Ark right next door in the house of Obed-Edom (2
Samuel 6:8–10). Three months later he got reports that the presence of
the Ark was blessing the household of Obed-Edom (2 Samuel 6:11–12).
And David said, “We need that blessing up here at headquarters.” So
they brought the Ark up with much carefulness, sacrificing a great many
offerings along the way (2 Samuel 6:13–14). No doubt they understood
those sacrifices as a bit like fire insurance. David didn’t know God as well
as he did later on. So you see in the Bible ongoing growth in the knowledge of God, and behind that growth is a very patient God who sometimes used dramatic means to win us all the way back to trust. That’s
the reason we study all sixty-six books of the Bible, by the way, so we
can get the full picture of how God dealt with His people.
Lou: One more incident out of the Old Testament, the story of
Elisha and the young men that came out and ridiculed him, then were
attacked by two “she bears” (2 Kings 2:23–24). Once again, it looks like
a pretty spectacular show.
Graham: The first thing we need to do is establish the irreverence
of the day. You read back a little further, and the king of Israel was consulting Baalzebub, the god of flies (2 Kings 1:16). Moreover, these boys
knew that Elijah had been translated to heaven. Yet they were so unim-
pressed that when Elisha came by, evidently a little short of hair, they
said, “Hey baldy, why don’t you go up too?” The irreverence in Israel
was so serious that God almost lost contact with His people there. But
He didn’t send a flood this time, instead He sent two she bears. Word of
this went out among the Israelites, and reverence picked up — but so did
fear. It is very difficult for God to relieve us of our fear and still
maintain our reverence and respect. That’s a most delicate goal to
accomplish.
Lou: All right, you’ve covered a number of God’s spectacular interventions in the Old Testament, but what about Jesus’ public ministry in
the New Testament? When He turned water into wine at the wedding
of Cana (John 2:1–11), didn’t that catch a lot of attention? Wasn’t that a
use of miracles to establish authority?
Graham: Such methods do have some usefulness at the beginning. I
wouldn’t deny Jesus the right to use whatever method He wishes to get
attention. But what counts is the way the miracle is conducted and what
follows after the miracle. After the miracle got their attention, they
observed and tested Him. As a result, some rejected Him and some
accepted Him.
Actually, turning water into wine is not that unusual in the Bible.
Do you remember how Moses turned bitter water sweet in the wilderness (Exodus 15:23–25)? And didn’t Elisha do something similar (2 Kings
2:19–22)? That’s not so remarkable. To me what’s more remarkable is
that Jesus was attending a wedding, and He wanted it to be happy. He
was very pleased to be there and to help them. He is the One who
thought up marriage in the first place. I love it that His first miracle was
at a wedding.
Lou: What about the feeding of the five thousand? Actually, the
story about feeding the five thousand is recorded in all four of the
Gospels (Matthew 14:21; Mark 6:44; Luke 9:14; John 6:10). So it certainly
made a powerful impact on the gospel writers and on the people. On one
occasion, at least, weren’t they ready to crown Him king in response to
the miracle (John 6:15)?
Graham: That’s right! Now this illustrates the point superbly.
Jesus realized that huge crowds were following Him for the miracles, and
that’s all. So right after these miracles He told them something very serious, “Unless you really accept Me and My teachings you will not be
saved” (based on John 6:50-63). And they all left Him. All they wanted
was free food and free healing.
Then He turned to the twelve and said, “Do you also wish to go?”
John 6:67, RSV. In the Greek there is a way of asking a question that
includes the answer within the question, yes or no. So the way it’s
worded in the Greek Jesus said, “You don’t want to go too, do you?”
And they said, “No; to whom else should we go? You have the words of
eternal life” (John 6:68). They weren’t entirely convinced; there was so
much they didn’t understand. But at least they chose to stay. Jesus must
have wondered at that point whether it had been worth coming to earth.
Only when He performed miracles did He get a crowd, and He did not
wish to get a crowd that way. Doesn’t it say something though, that
when He won a following by miracles, He turned them away. Miracles
are no basis for authority.
Lou: What about the raising of Lazarus (John 11:39–44)? He was
dead for four days! Wasn’t that outstanding evidence of Jesus’ authority? Wouldn’t you believe just on the basis of that performance?
Graham: Some call that His crowning miracle. Yet it’s significant
that Elijah had resurrected the dead before (1 Kings 17:17–24). So even
that was certainly not unique. What matters, I think, is the total situation within which Jesus raised Lazarus. For example, He had just been
crying a short while before (John 11:35). And they said: “Behold, how
He loved him” (John 11:36). Actually, the very gentleness of Jesus was
the kind of thing that disappointed many of His followers. But then
moments later He demonstrated that He could resurrect the dead. And
the theologians knew exactly what this implied. That’s why it says,
“From then on, they plotted to murder Him.” John 11:53. They realized
that step by step He was demonstrating beyond question that He was
not only infinitely powerful but equally gracious, the One who fitted the
Old Testament description.
More than that, He had the wisdom to wait until the fourth day
(John 11:17), and they must have realized it. Likely they had questioned
His resurrection of Jairus’ daughter before (Mark 5:22, 35-43; Luke 8:41–
42, 49–56). Some of them believed that the spirit hovered nearby for
three days after death, in case of resuscitation. For this reason, He waited until the fourth day, until the most skeptical person in His audience
would admit that Lazarus was really dead. And then, when He said,
“Roll away the stone,” He wanted to hear them say, “Don’t roll it away,
he stinks” (John 11:39). Because then they would all admit that he really
was dead. “Now,” He said, “come forth.” John 11:43–44. They had no
answer for that. And when you’ve run out of evidence, you turn to vio-
lence. And they tried to kill Him.
Lou: So the raising of Lazarus did not serve to convince them, it
actually turned them against Him all the more. In fact, it sealed His
doom.
Graham: Yes. But to some of us, the idea that God could one minute
be crying and the next minute resurrecting the dead; that sounds good.
Lou: So the chief priests went about to even plot Lazarus’ death
(John 12:9–11).
Graham: That’s right; to get rid of the evidence. Lazarus was going
around explaining his death and resurrection. They didn’t like that testimony.
Lou: You spoke of the charge that God is arbitrary, harsh, severe
and so forth. The question has come in, “If you’re talking about arbitrary, isn’t something like the Fourth Commandment arbitrary?”
Graham: Well, it is often so described, and it is felt to make a beautiful test of our obedience. But if that is all the Sabbath is, it won’t be
much of a blessing. Jesus said: “I gave it to you as a gift; you weren’t
made for the Sabbath” (Mark 2:27–28). The best answer for every question, in my book, is to go back to Genesis and read all sixty-six. If you
start with Genesis and read through, you will find all the meanings of the
Sabbath. The Sabbath reminds us of all that was revealed about God during creation week: The message of freedom, and how He shares His creative power with us (Exodus 20:11). And then it was given to remind us
of the Exodus (Deuteronomy 5:15), another monument to freedom. The
Sabbath also came after crucifixion day. So the Sabbath reminds us of all
the answers given on crucifixion Friday (Luke 23:54–56). And then
Hebrews says the Sabbath is a type of the rest to come (Hebrews 4:9–11).
I don’t know of any commandment that has more reasons behind it.
Therefore I will not call it arbitrary. That idea comes from “here a little
and there a little,” you see. When we take the Bible as a whole, we discover that God has never asked us to do anything arbitrary. The Sabbath
command is actually the most meaningful and significant of the ten.
Lou: All right. Maybe the fourth does have a great deal of meaning
if you look at the whole record, all sixty-six books. But what about the
first commandment: “Thou shalt have no other gods (Exodus 20:3)”? That
sounds a little peevish, wanting to be the only one.
Graham: Yes. How about number two also? “Thou shalt have no
other gods before Me, and I am a jealous God. I don’t like it when you
have other gods” (based on Exodus 20:4–6). Well again, if you take the
whole Bible and you are convinced of the kind of person God is, I am
glad He says what He does. If He were not in support of freedom and the
quality of life that He has revealed, then it would be arbitrary of Him to
be the only one. But God is really saying, “Being the kind of God I am,
wishing nothing but the best for you, and valuing nothing more than
your freedom, I don’t want you to go after Dagon or Molech. Molech
would require your babies to be burned alive in his hollow hands. And
there are those crocodile and frog gods in Egypt. And also Ashtoreth
and Baal — don’t go after them. In fact, if you go after something abominable, you will become abominable yourself. But if you make Me your
God, you will become ever more free, and ever more intelligent. So don’t
hurt yourself.”
Lou: You’re saying it’s a request, a plea. It is said out of love.
Graham: Right. But that only makes sense if God is not arbitrary,
if He is the kind of person we believe Him to be. He is really saying,
“Don’t lose your freedom, and every other good thing you have, by
going after these degraded deities. Stay with Me. When I say that I am
jealous; I mean that I am jealous for you. I don’t want you to be hurt.”
I like that.
Lou: We would not want our children to have anything that would
hurt them.
Graham: Isn’t that kind of jealousy all right? I always felt my parents were jealous for my reputation. I derived great comfort from that.
My mother wouldn’t tell on me for anything. And so we have a God
who is jealous for His children, and that’s marvelous.
Lou: I want to shift gears just a little bit. Here is a question that
arises, perhaps, out of a bit of frustration: “If scholars and theologians
still disagree about God, what chance do I have to figure all this out?”
Graham: Yes. I’d encourage this person to read the Gospels again.
They’re not that complicated. I think theologians have made it complicated. It impresses me that “the common people heard Him gladly”
(Mark 12:37). I think we’re the ones that have made the Bible appear to
be difficult.
Lou: I once received letters from an individual who talked about
the impression of the Holy Spirit, about how the Spirit came on him and
he wrote and wrote. That leads me to a question that someone else has
raised: “If I pray for the Holy Spirit to guide and then I have this deep
conviction, isn’t that enough?”
Graham: It might seem to be. Fortunately the Bible warns us about
that and offers protection, some safeguards. This warm feeling of conviction within could come from prejudice, it could come from indigestion, it
could come from all kinds of things. The Spirit will not lead you away
from what He has already inspired. So we should always judge the work
of the Holy Spirit by the revelations He has previously inspired.
Lou: But what difference does it make what kind of person I
believe God to be? What does it matter as long as I submit to His authority? Why not just say, “God has said it; I believe it; that’s it”?
Graham: Well, that reminds me of what we said about Saul of
Tarsus. Saul’s conception of God had driven the way he did evangelism
before his experience on the Damascus road. In God’s name he imprisoned people and he had them stoned to death. But when he got the true
picture of God so dramatically, Saul proceeded from the thunders of
Sinai to the still, small voice at the mouth of the cave in a few minutes.
He really grew up in a hurry. Paul changed his picture of God and it
changed his whole method of evangelism.
Lou: So you’re saying that one’s picture of God inevitably affects
everything.
Graham: Everything: The way we worship, the way we witness to
others, the way we behave.
Lou: Someone has written this: “Our Great Dane is gentle, faithful,
patient, trusting, of lovely disposition. What does this dog’s wonderful
quality of character say about the human lack of achievements along
these lines?”
Graham: Oh, I rather like that question. I think we can learn a lot
from nature. Even the posture of a Great Dane is magnificent compared
to our slouching! There are so many ways in which the animals are an
example to us. But when it comes to faithfulness, think of a dog that
weighs more than most of us, having enormous strength, yet being safe
to have around in the house all the time! I wouldn’t want to be just a
dog, but I think it’s wonderful that mere creatures can show these wonderful qualities, and I think it speaks well of God.
Lou: A final question: “Why did Jesus have to die? Wasn’t God’s
mercy sufficient by itself?” Isn’t that the topic of Chapter Eight?
Graham: The answer to that question is really the climax of everything. Everything points to the cross. And fortunately, that’s where all
Christians agree. We may have many different theological opinions, but
almost all Christians agree we ought to go to the foot of the cross. We
ought to watch the way Jesus died. We ought to listen to His cry and ask
the question, “Is death the result of sin? Is it torture and execution at
the hands of our gracious God?” We’ll continue with that in the next
chapter.
