Chapter Six
Evaluating the Evidence
We have learned from our study of the Bible that all God asks of us is
trust. If we would only trust in Him enough, He could readily heal the
damage sin has done. That is all He asked before the war began. That’s
all He asks now of those who have been damaged and caught up in this
war. All He will ever ask of us in the future is trust. Where there is
mutual trust and trustworthiness, no cheating, there is perfect security,
perfect freedom, perfect peace. And this is what God desires the most.
But is that conclusion based on the right interpretation of the Bible?
Have we rightly weighed and understood the biblical evidence?
Others have read the biblical evidence and drawn different conclusions. Many of these are sincere followers of God, yet they perceive Him
as arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. Many of them
earnestly seek to win others to that kind of God. But if that is the kind
of person God is, then He is not worthy of our trust, nor is He safe to
trust. Sadly, this picture of God sounds a lot like the accusations Satan
has made against God from the beginning of the conflict.
In responding to the accusations against Him, God is not willing to
issue mere claims or denials. Anybody could do that. But when a person
has been falsely accused of being untrustworthy, it does no good to deny
it or to simply claim to be trustworthy. So God has answered the charges
against Him with the evidence of demonstration. Only by the demonstration of trustworthiness over a sufficiently long period of time, and under
a great variety of circumstances, can trust be re-established and confirmed. The Bible is a record of just such a demonstration.
The best approach, then, is to pick up our Bibles and read the evidence, all of it. But when we pick up our Bibles, there are questions that
naturally arise. We considered three of them in the previous chapter.
How do we know we have the right books? How do we know we have
the words accurately preserved through all the centuries? And how do
we know they have been accurately translated from the original Hebrew,
Aramaic, and Greek? We have shown that there is more than enough evidence for answering those questions. We can confidently say that for all
practical purposes we have the books of the Bible as originally written.
And the safest approach for interpreting the Bible books is to read them
as a whole. When you approach things that way, almost every version is
dependable.
Finding the Correct Meaning
In this chapter, there is another question that deserves to be considered. Even if we have the right books and the right words, and even
if we have those words adequately translated, what about the meaning?
The Bible was written in other languages, for other peoples in other cultures. So how can we, living in different parts of the world, this far
down through the centuries, feel confident that we have really found the
correct meaning? The only way, I believe, is to pick up the Bible, read it
through, and see what we can learn about God. I am so grateful for the
more than one hundred times I’ve gone through all sixty-six books in
company with others. Each time we do it there are certain questions that
arise. Some of them are simple ones that are quite readily resolved. I
thought we might look at some of those first.
• • • • •
Only by the demonstration of trustworthiness over a sufficiently long period of time, and under a great variety of circumstances, can trust be re-established and confirmed. The
Bible is a record of just such a demonstration.
• • • • •
The best loved English version in all history has been the King
James Version. But reading through that Bible, what does one do with a
passage like Habakkuk 2:7: “Thou shalt be for booties unto them.” What
does that mean? Can you see booties hanging from the rear view mirror
in a car? Is that what that is? Or what about Job 41:18: “By his neesings
a light doth shine. . . .” Have you seen any neesings lately? Now the old
English word booties meant loot, or plunder. Neesings meant sneezings.
Then Exodus 28:11 speaks of “ouches of gold.” That would seem like
something the dentist should be concerned about. And yet it actually
meant settings in jewelry. Luke 17:9 says: “I trow not.” Have you
trowed lately? That actually means “I think not.”
These are not errors in the King James. It is just that with the passage of time, about a thousand words in that Bible have changed their
meaning; in fact sometimes the meaning is completely reversed. But
there are easy remedies for the student of Scripture. Whole books have
been written on the archaic words in the King James Version. Another
option is to look these words up in a Bible dictionary or a commentary.
There is even the revision called the New King James. The meanings
given in the paragraph above were taken from that modernized version
of the King James. Another option is to compare the KJV with any other
modern version and the meaning of most of these unfamiliar words
would become clear.
A slightly more significant change in the meaning of a word is in
Romans 1:13, KJV: “Often times I purposed to come unto you, (but was
let [emphasis supplied] hitherto,) . . .” Well, if Paul was let, why didn’t he
go? “Let” in those days did not mean to permit; it meant to prevent or
hinder. This is still the word often used in the game of tennis. If you’ve
served and your ball has hit the net and dropped into the appropriate
service box on the other side, it is not a “net ball,” it is supposed to be a
“let ball.” At Wimbledon it is always a “let ball,” which means a ball that
was hindered or prevented from proceeding on to the server’s goal. In
Romans 1:13, Paul intended to visit Rome, but he was hindered from
doing so.
An even more significant illustration of meaning change is in 1
Thessalonians 4:15, KJV: “We which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent [emphasis supplied] them which are
asleep.” Paul surely wasn’t saying that when the Lord comes and the
dead rise, we who are alive won’t want the dead to go up first. If that
were true, we wouldn’t be very safe to save, doing that to those former
saints now rising! But it has no such meaning. The old English word
“prevent” actually means “to precede, to go before.” Now the passage
makes sense. “Prevent” in those days did not mean prevent, it meant to
precede.
The early Christians were grieving that some of their loved ones
had died before the Lord returned. They had been under the impression
that they would live to see Him come. What would you tell a dying
Christian who said in disappointment, “I had hoped I would live to see
the Lord come”? There’s a beautiful message in 1 Thessalonians 4, where
Paul says, “Look, the dead are at no disadvantage. We who are alive and
remain shall not precede those who have fallen asleep.” Who will rise
first? The dead in Christ will rise first. Then we who are alive and
remain shall be caught up with them to meet the Lord in the air. This is
a great paragraph to read at funerals. But it has to be translated right.
Not that it is an error. It’s just that the key word has changed meaning
through the years. The passage is a great message of comfort when it is
properly translated into modern speech.
Another puzzling passage, which sometimes gives rise to strange
theology, is in John 20:17, KJV. Mary sees Jesus on resurrection Sunday
and falls at His feet to worship Him. And Jesus says, “Touch Me not.”
Now why couldn’t she touch Him? Jesus explains: “I am not yet ascended to My Father.” Does that mean that if Mary had touched Jesus, He
would not have been able to go up to heaven, and the whole plan of salvation would have come to nothing? Was her restraint that morning as
important as the crucifixion? That is impossible. That would really violate common sense. So one needs to look more carefully. In the original
language, there are two ways of saying “don’t do” something. One is,
“don’t begin to do it.” The other is, “don’t go on doing it.” In this text
Jesus was saying: “Don’t go on holding Me. Don’t cling to Me.” The
modern versions all have this correctly. Then it is a perfectly gracious
message. There is nothing arbitrary about it at all.
Another important one is John 2:4. Perhaps you remember the
wedding at Cana, when they ran out of wine and Mary said to Jesus,
“They need some wine” (John 2:3). Did He turn to His mother and say,
“Woman, what have I to do with thee?” Let’s say you have a son who is
not responding too politely when his mother asks for help doing the
dishes. So you think, “Well, at worship we’ll read about how polite
Jesus always was to His mother. Why don’t we read the Gospel of John
for worship?” If you do that, John 1 will be all right. But then you will
come to John 2 and Cana. You are reading, hoping that your son will listen and see how polite Jesus always was. And then Jesus says to His
mother, “Woman, what have I to do with thee?” And your son says,
“That is what I will do next time Mother asks me to dry the dishes. I’ll
say, ‘Woman, what have I to do with thee?’” Then you’ll wish you had
started reading some other Gospel!
You know that can’t be the case. God is love and love is never rude.
You know that Jesus wasn’t rude. Once again we need to get back into
the language, the culture, and the idiom of the day. “Woman” can mean
wife or mother or whatever the circumstances called for. What Jesus
said was the equivalent of “mother,” not just “woman.” “Mother, how
is it you bring that problem to Me? I have never performed a miracle
before. My hour has not yet come.” I once heard a Jewish scholar say,
“One thing is for sure, Jesus spoke politely to His mother in the idiom
of the day.” In the Phillips translation, it says: “Mother, why do you
bring that problem to Me?”
What About the More Difficult Questions?
There are many other questions that arise. The ones we have just
brought up have been easy to handle. If you have access to a modern version, none of them will be a problem. But a more serious question arises.
Why do there seem to be so few theological statements in the Bible? You
can go pages and pages without a statement about God. Why doesn’t the
Bible read: “God is love, God never changes, God can be trusted”? If it
did, many of us would be willing to believe it. But those are just claims,
and the Bible itself warns against accepting mere claims. We need evidence. We need demonstration. Which leads to the next question that
often arises.
• • • • •
Why is there so much historical detail in the Bible? So much
of it seems of such little importance. But if God’s way of
revealing Himself is demonstration, it is involving Himself
in human affairs and saying, “Watch the way I handle situations. That’s the way to find out what I’m like.”
• • • • •
Why is there so much historical detail in the Bible? So much of it
seems of such little importance. But if God’s way of revealing Himself is
demonstration, it is involving Himself in human affairs and saying,
“Watch the way I handle situations. That’s the way to find out what I’m
like.” If we did not have the historical details, we would not be in a position to recreate those original settings and understand why God would
thunder one time and speak so softly another time.
Think of Sinai, for example. God comes down to speak to His people
on that mountain, and He thunders. There is lightning, and there’s an
earthquake. The people are terrified. God says to Moses: “Build a fence
around the mountain. Don’t let those people come too close. If anyone
comes near the fence, he is to be stoned. If anyone breaks through the
fence, I’ll burst forth upon him and consume him” (based on Exodus 19).
And the people stood there so terrified that they said to Moses, “Don’t
let God speak to us, lest we die” (Exodus 20:19). Now we sing, “Nearer,
Still Nearer” and “Speak to Me, Lord,” but we are not at the foot of
Mount Sinai. Was that some other God? Or was that the Son of God
speaking to the people in that manner on Mount Sinai?
Well, we have to recreate the historical setting. How were they
behaving at the foot of the mountain? They were grumbling, and complaining, and irreverent. And the only way God could get their attention, and hold it long enough to share some truth about Himself, was to
run the risk of terrifying them. Even so, forty days later, when the thunders had died away, they were dancing drunk and irreverent around the
golden calf. Evidently God had to raise His voice that loud because of the
circumstances prevailing at the time.
An illustration of God’s preferred way of persuading us — not
with denials, not with claims, but with evidence — is provided by the
story of John the Baptist. John risked his life to present his cousin Jesus
to the people. And how gracious he had been: “He must increase, but I
must decrease.” John 3:30. Now John was in prison. Jesus taught that
you really ought to visit people in prison (Matthew 25:39–40); but Jesus
never came to see His cousin. And eventually John sent emissaries to
Christ. “Are you really the One or not? Should we be looking for
another?” Matthew 11:3. That is a sad inquiry. Jesus could have
responded to him, “I am indeed the One and I expect you to believe it!”
But that could have been the Devil masquerading as Christ. Instead, He
invited John’s two disciples to spend the day with Him. When the day
was over, the two men went back to the prison to see John.
 “Did He answer my question?”
 “No!”
 “But what did you see? What did you hear?”
And in the text it’s recorded:
Jesus gave them this reply. “Go and tell John what you hear and
what you see — that blind men are recovering their sight, cripples are
walking, lepers being healed, the deaf hearing, the dead being raised to
life and the good news is being given to those in need. And happy is
the man who never loses his faith in me.” Matthew 11:4–6, Phillips.
And when the men arrived back at the prison and told this to John,
John may have remembered passages like Isaiah 35:6 and Isaiah 61:1. And
he knew, “He is the One.” Jesus did not answer with a claim, He offered
evidence. This is God’s way of revealing Himself, and it is the only
dependable way.
Why Spend Time on the Old Testament?
We go back to the beginning of our Bibles; to Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. And questions inevitably arise,
“Why so much? Why so many details? And why so many varied pictures
of God?” Then we remember Hebrews 1:
In the past God spoke to our forefathers through the prophets at
many times, and in various ways [emphases supplied], but in
these last days he has spoken to us by his Son. . . . The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact representation of his being. . . .
Hebrews 1:1–3, NIV.
But that raises another question. If we have the Son, why should
we spend so much time in the Old Testament? Why not read the
Gospels? How clear the picture is there! “Blessed are the poor in spirit”
(Matthew 5:3). “Pray for your enemies” (Matthew 5:44). How gracious
that whole message is. Then you see the way Jesus treated sinners. How
forgiving! Is there anything arbitrary, exacting, or severe in the record of
the Gospels? Look at how Jesus treated Judas. He washed the feet of His
betrayer the night before He died (John 13). Look at how Jesus seemed to
cover people’s sins as much as He possibly could. He didn’t even expose
the men who brought that woman taken in adultery (John 8:1–11). And
when Jairus’ daughter was raised and the crowd rushed out of the room
to celebrate, who was it that called after them and said: “This little girl
is hungry. Get her something to eat” (Mark 5:43; Luke 8:55). The Bible
even says that the Son of God cried at the funeral of one of His friends
(John 11:35).
None of this sounds like the Devil’s picture of God. In the Gospels,
Jesus is clearly not the kind of person Satan has made God out to be.
Then why don’t we just settle for the magnificent record in the Gospels?
However, as one reads on through the Gospels, one cannot help noticing
Jesus’ own use of the Old Testament: “You diligently study the
Scriptures because you think that by them you possess eternal life”. John
5:39, NIV. That’s almost a form of bibliolatry, worshiping the Bible as
if there were some magical power in the book. “No,” Jesus said, “these
are the Scriptures that testify about me, yet you refuse to come to me to
have life.” John 5:39–40, NIV. He speaks of the Old Testament
Scriptures as bearing witness to the truth about Him. Why would we
want to waste them? And note also how He used the Old Testament in
Luke: “And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to
them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.” Luke 24:27,
NIV.
To really follow Christ’s example, then, is to use the Old
Testament. Where do you think He found His picture of God? How did
He know God so well? He grew up with the thirty-nine books of the
Old Testament. We would be very wasteful not to use them too. So back
again we go to the Old Testament, remembering that 2 Timothy 3:16
tells us that “all Scripture inspired of God is profitable.”
• • • • •
To follow Christ’s example is to use the Old Testament.
Where do you think He found His picture of God? How did
He know God so well?
• • • • •
Scripture starts with the lovely picture in Eden, but at the end of
the first week, God says to our first parents, “In the day you eat thereof,
you will die” (Genesis 2:17). And right there is the problem. Did God
mean, “If you disobey Me, I’ll kill you”? That does sound arbitrary and
severe. Moreover, the original pair were cast out of Eden on their first
offense (Genesis 3). What if all children were thrown out of their homes
the first time they disobeyed? We would have a lot of homeless children
in the world. Are we more forgiving than God?
 We read about the Flood, when God drowned not just sinful men,
but women and children, babies, and all of their pets (Genesis 6:13, 17;
7:4, and especially 7:21–23). Then we go on to Sodom and Gomorrah,
that awful burning of human beings (Genesis 19:24–25). And then the
story of Lot’s wife (Genesis 19:26). How many of you women, leaving
the home where you had reared your children, wouldn’t want to take at
least one little peek over your shoulder? Yet look what happened to
Lot’s wife. And look at all the fighting in the Old Testament. And then
you find God saying, “When you fight, don’t just kill the soldiers. Go
into the villages afterwards. Break into the homes. Kill the women. Kill
the children. Kill the babies. Kill the pets. Leave alive nothing that
breathes” (1 Samuel 15:3). That same day King Saul decided not to kill
everybody (1 Samuel 15:8–9). And God was not pleased (1 Samuel 15:18–
19, 23–24).
Most of us would say that doesn’t sound like the New Testament.
How could Jesus get the kind of picture He had of His Father from these
stories? And there are more of them, like the stoning of Achan (Joshua
7). The worst part of that story is not so much whether Achan and his
family deserved to be stoned, but that God asked His own people to do
the stoning (Joshua 7:12–13, 24–25). And then there’s “an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth” (Exodus 21:24; Leviticus 24:20; Deuteronomy
19:21; Matthew 5:38), and, “The gluttonous child is to be stoned”
(Deuteronomy 21:20–21), and, “The illegitimate child is to be banished
from the camp for ten generations” (Deuteronomy 23:2).
Jesus and the Old Testament
No wonder many people don’t know what to do with the Old
Testament. No wonder even one of Jesus’ own disciples didn’t. Philip
said to Jesus: “Tell us about the Father and we will be satisfied.” John
14:8. What Philip seems to be saying is: “We aren’t asking about You.
We worship You as the Son of God. And to our great surprise we are
not afraid of You. What we want to know about is the Father. We want
to know about the One who drowned all but eight in the Flood (Genesis
7:21–23) and said, ‘If you disobey Me, I will kill you.’ We want to know
about the God who killed the firstborn in Egypt (Exodus 11:4–6) and the
185,000 Assyrians (2 Kings 19:35). The God who killed Uzzah when he
touched the Ark (2 Samuel 6:3–8) and turned Lot’s wife into a pillar of
salt (Genesis 19:26). The One who swallowed up Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram (Numbers 16:1–35), and burned up Nadab and Abihu
(Leviticus 10:1–3; Numbers 3:2–4), and sent the she bears against the
boys who mocked Elisha (2 Kings 2:23–24).” And so on down the list.
“Jesus, could the Father possibly be like You?”
Jesus replied: “Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father” (John
14:9, NIV). Since the account in John 14–16 is quite condensed, Jesus
could well have continued at this point, “And Philip, as for those difficult stories in the Old Testament, don’t misunderstand them to mean
that the Father is less gracious and less approachable than you have found
Me to be. It so happens that I am the One who led Israel in the wilderness (1 Corinthians 10:4). The command to stone Achan was Mine.
Philip, why don’t you ask Me why? I’d love to tell you. I would almost
put off the crucifixion if you disciples would only ask Me.” But according
to the record, they never asked Him.
Jesus went on to say something extraordinary to them: “I . . . will tell
you plainly about my Father.” John 16:25, NIV. Then in John 16:26, He
spoke words which most Christians have not yet incorporated into the
good news. Jesus said: “I do not promise to intercede with the Father for
you, for the Father loves you himself. . . . [emphasis supplied]” John
16:26–27, Goodspeed. These may be the most astonishing words in the
Bible; we will spend much time on them later.
What a shame they didn’t ask Him what He meant by these words
(John 14:9; 16:25–27). Instead, they wanted to argue about the positions
they would hold in the Kingdom. Since they didn’t ask, then it’s really
left to us to ask. “Jesus, why did You order the stoning of Achan? How
could You, gentle Jesus, do that? And Jesus, why did You set up the
whole priestly system of intercession and mediatorial work, when You
said there is no need for anyone to intercede with the Father, for the
Father Himself loves us?” I wish they would have asked Him these questions, because then the biblical record would hold the most incredible
information from the Lord Himself. Well, we had better ask now. If we
ask, what important answers may come as we ask of every story, teaching, and event in the Bible, “What does this tell us about God?”
Fortunately, some Pharisees asked Jesus a difficult question which
gives us some idea as to what He might have said on those other occasions. When they asked Jesus about divorce, they said, “Jesus, You
know the texts that say we may divorce our wives. Moses gave us permission. What is Your view on the subject?” Matthew 19:7. And Jesus
explained why He had given Moses directions as to how the people
could (if they wished) divorce their wives:
The Pharisees asked him, “Why, then, did Moses give the law for
a man to hand his wife a divorce notice and send her away?” Jesus
answered, “Moses gave you permission to divorce your wives because
you are so hard to teach. But it was not like that at the time of creation.” Matthew 19:7–8, GNT.
You see, in Moses’ day when you tired of your wife, you simply
sent her home (Deuteronomy 24:1–3). You didn’t even have to give her
camel’s fare to get there. All you had to say was, “Out! I have a new
wife moving in this afternoon.” Through Moses God said, “If you’re
going to do it, do it in a more humane manner.” But God’s real feeling is
expressed in Malachi: “I hate divorce.” Malachi 2:16, RSV. Most people
do.
Jesus’ reaction to the Pharisees is the key to so many other places
in the Bible where God seems to recommend something strange or
wrong. God is not contradicting Himself in those places; He’s meeting
people where they are. The Matthew 19 passage illustrates a funda-
mental principle of interpretation, which we will use throughout the
rest of our conversations, the principle of context. It was the context,
the setting, that determined the meaning of a passage when it was originally written. To the extent that we can recreate and recover that original context, we are in a position to recover the original meaning.
Reading Out of Context
There are plenty of challenging texts in the Bible, when they are
read out of context. When Paul says, “It’s all right to marry if you must,
but I wish you could be as I am (1 Corinthians 7:8–9),” does he mean
that married people are second class saints? No, put that statement it in
its context. Similarly, why did Paul say, “I won’t allow a woman to
speak in church” (1 Corinthians 14:34–35; 1 Timothy 2:12)? And why
does the Old Testament say, “You cannot boil a kid in its mother’s milk”
(Exodus 23:19; 34:26; Deuteronomy 14:21)? And then you turn to
Judges and read about Samson, filled with the Spirit, killing a thousand
men with the jawbone of an ass (Judges 15:15–17). You read about that
fat king and the dagger that was thrust into him (Judges 3:15–28). And
the dreadful story of the Levite and his concubine (Judges 19:1–30).
One of the worst illustrations of reading the Bible out of context is
a book called The Bible Unmasked. A man who’s avowed purpose was to
destroy confidence in the Bible and in God, collected every unpleasant
story of immorality and cruelty in the Bible and laid them end to end
with the preface, “Would you mothers let your children read this sort of
thing?” When I mentioned this book in one of my classes, a student came
back with the best answer to this I have ever heard. “If you took the
medical book and cut out all the pictures of disease and all the symptoms
of disease and printed them all by themselves, it would be a useless,
repulsive publication. The only justification for printing those things is
that they are always presented in the setting of the remedy.”
The Bible is very candid in its depiction and description of sin. But
it always presents sin in the setting of the remedy. Otherwise the Bible
would not be fit to read. But that’s why we must read it as a whole. For
example, did you know that there are two books in the Bible that don’t
even mention God? Not once. But if you take those two books, Esther
and Song of Solomon, and put them in the larger setting of the Bible as
a whole, they say wonderful things about our God. You see, to be fair
with the evidence, we must read it as a whole. After going through the
Bible more than a hundred times, this is a summary of my firmest convic-
tions about its purpose:
The great purpose of the Bible is to reveal the truth about our
heavenly Father, that we may be won back to Him in love and trust.
This truth, this everlasting good news, is to be found in every one
of the sixty-six books. But to discover this truth we must learn
more than just what happened to Samson and Delilah, to David and
Bathsheba, to Gideon and his fleece. The all-important question is,
what do these stories tell us about God?
If one does not ask this question, much of the content of
Scripture may seem unrelated to the plan of salvation, even perplexing, sometimes even contradictory. But when one learns to view
the Bible as a whole, there emerges a consistent picture of an allwise and gracious God who seems willing to go to any length to
keep in touch with His people, to stoop down and reach them
where they are, to speak a language they can understand. And the
further one reads on book by book, the more one is moved with love
and admiration for a God who would be willing to run such a risk,
to pay such a price, in order to keep open the lines of communication between Himself and His wayward children.
God will save all who trust Him. But He has not asked us to
trust Him as a stranger. The Bible — all of it — is a record of God’s
revelation and a demonstration of infinite trustworthiness.
This statement of principle will continue to guide the rest of our
twenty conversations about God. We want to look at all of the biblical
evidence in this way.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: It seems that you are asking us to do a lot of thinking and studying. There’s a bumper sticker around which says, “God
said it. I believe it. That settles it for me.” That sounds refreshingly simple. Why wouldn’t that be the appropriate way to go?
Graham Maxwell: The difficulty is that people pick the passages
from the Bible that they want to label in that way, and they don’t read
all the others. For example: “Take the tithe and buy strong drink with
it, and rejoice before the Lord” (Deuteronomy 14:24–26). God said it. Do
you believe it? Or take another passage, “Give wine to the poor, that
they may forget their misery” (Proverbs 31:6–7). Does that settle it for
you? “God has said it. I believe it.” But you really can’t do that. On the
surface, it sounds like an expression of humility and teachableness, which
would be very commendable. But no one can really follow that if they
read everything God says. Because when you read the Bible as a whole,
you discover the hazard of plucking pieces out like that.
Lou: So you are pushing us at the point of meaning. We just cannot
simply jump around here and there and think we understand what it
means. If we are serious about God’s Word, we need to be serious about
the context.
• • • • •
God will save all who trust Him. But He has not asked us to
trust Him as a stranger. The Bible—all of it— is a record of
God’s revelation and a demonstration of infinite trustworthiness.
• • • • •
Graham: The Bible says, “All Scripture is inspired of God” (2
Timothy 3:16). So if the saying on that bumper sticker includes the
whole Bible, then I’m comfortable with it.
Lou: Would you suggest a better bumper sticker, perhaps?
Graham: How about this: “Thank You for the evidence. Thank You
for making it so clear. And thank You most of all for what it cost.” It
would take a big bumper, wouldn’t it?
Lou: We have quite a backlog of questions. “Using the model of the
Larger View, how does one fit together the apparently violent God of
the Old Testament, the friendly God of the New Testament, and the
destructive God of Revelation at the end of this earth?” Put that all
together.
Graham: Ah, that’s very well stated. That assumes, of course, that
God is always severe and violent in the Old Testament. Yet some of the
most gentle and moving statements about God are in the Old Testament.
For example, in the parable of the vineyard, “What more can I do for you
than I have done?” Isaiah 5:4. “The Lord is my Shepherd” (Psalm 23:1).
So the Old Testament is not entirely violent, nor is the New Testament
entirely gentle. When Ananias and Sapphira cheated with their offering,
they died right on the church floor (Acts 5:5, 10). So I actually find a consistency running through all the Bible, and the real question would be,
why is there a varied picture running from Genesis to Revelation, culminating in the third angel’s message, which is so violent (Revelation 14:9–
11)?
I wouldn’t know how to handle it, except by taking it as a whole
and finding the same God dealing with a great variety of people.
When we are irreverent, there may be she bears, thunder and lightning,
or an earthquake. And yet I see the same gentle One behind it all, grieving when those people had to be treated that way. But what else could
He do?
I don’t think a quick answer like this would ever satisfy someone
who has raised the question so thoughtfully. The best response would
be to sit down together and go through all the sixty-six books. It takes a
little time, but there are no shortcuts to this. And it would be wise to
keep that larger question in mind as one reads every book in the sixtysix.
Lou: This one ties in with that as well. “Satan held that God was
not able to be just and merciful at the same time. Today He offers us
mercy, but will He not kill us finally? Are we not to be consumed in His
fire? If we are, how then do we call Him a God of love? Why did Jesus
have to die? Was not God’s mercy sufficient?” That’s another one of
those full message questions.
Graham: Yes. These are the really important questions, the kind
that have to be answered for the universe to be secure. That’s why we
see that theme running all through Scripture, culminating in the death
of Jesus. And that’s why we have a whole chapter in this book on the
most costly and convincing evidence. There was no other way to answer
those questions than for God to come in human form and die as He did.
So the great controversy view doesn’t make light of the death of Christ.
It makes it infinitely more significant. Because there is no other way to
answer those questions, and we will deal with those at length in
Chapter Eight.
Lou: This next question is similar. “If God’s character is love (1
John 4:8) and God loves us so much (John 3:16), why was pain and death
so prevalent in the Old and New Testaments? And is it God who will
actually destroy man in the end? Or is it sin and Satan that causes
destruction? If God does destroy, then is that contrary to His own
Word?”
Graham: I too couldn’t live without an answer to those questions,
and one should work on them. But I’m glad the Bible does not settle for
just claims. It has actually cost a great deal to answer those questions.
Now on the violence in the Old Testament, we know we’re all
caught up in the consequences of this war. We also bring a lot of this on
ourselves, to be sure. God sometimes disciplines those He loves. And the
Devil is also at work. There are many causes of trouble and difficulty. We
plan to look at them all. But I don’t expect a neat answer to a question
like that.
 The biggest question, however, may be, “Will God destroy us in
the end?” If all God asks of us is love and trust, and if we don’t give it
to Him, is He going to destroy us in the end? This would be like God saying, “You either love Me, or I’ll destroy you.” And if that’s the way He
is, I cannot trust Him. I do not care to live with Him. I do not believe
He’s that way; but it cost the death of Christ to prove it. So to answer
that question we have to watch Jesus die. Did the Father destroy His
Son? The cross is the central answer to all of this, and we will look
deeply into that answer in Chapter Eight.
Lou: Let’s shift gears to a question about the Flood, which is still
in a similar vein: “On the subject of the Flood, it is apparent that God
didn’t do things right the first time. So He had to send a Flood and start
all over again. What would you do with that?”
Graham: That question makes a lot of sense, since the text says: “It
repented the Lord that he had made man. . . .” Genesis 6:6, KJV. Or as
some versions say: “He was sorry that he had made man” (RSV). As you
go through the sixty-six, you run into several places where God is pictured as if He were not too aware of what is going on and certainly not
having as much foreknowledge as we think. For example, when He comes
to the Garden of Eden, He says, “Where are you?” And Adam says,
“We’re over here.” Did God then say, “Oh, thank you. I didn’t know”?
Genesis 3:10–11. Another time He came to Abraham (before the burning
of Sodom and Gomorrah) and said, “Abraham, I’ve come down to check
out the reports I’ve received, to see if they are correct or not” (Genesis
18:21). Now we’ve all assumed that God is getting very good reporting.
But in this case, He acted as if He didn’t to make a point. God meets people where they are.
There are many places in the Bible like that, where God talks in
very human language. And so in this case with the Flood it grieved God
that he had made man (Genesis 6:6, NIV). My understanding would be
that He foreknew all of this, and He had now come to the time when
there were only eight people left on this planet with whom He could
communicate. And the answers to the questions in the Great
Controversy had not yet been given. So God, as it were, turns to the uni-
verse and says, “I’m really going to test your faith in Me. The next thing
you see will stun you.” And He drowned all but eight to preserve the
one remaining point of contact He had with the human race. It was the
only way He could go on unfolding His plan.
I’m sure the Devil cried, “Foul! I told you He’s that kind of a God.
You either love Him or He’ll drown you. He’ll burn you, have you
stoned, or swallow you up.” The risk God took with the Flood suggests
just how important it was to do what He did. The risk was that great.
Had He not done that, everything would have ended at that time. And
the answers to the great questions had not yet been given. The Flood
has to be put in the total setting of the universe with the angels watching. God ran a great risk of being misunderstood at that time. But I
believe it was all in His plan.
Lou: You say that everything would have ended at that point. Do
you mean that the whole human race was so evil that it would selfdestruct?
• • • • •
I think the Old Testament is magnificently clear, but only
when it is read as a whole. I find no break between the Old
and the New, except that in the New, Christ is here in
human form to confirm everything that has been described
and anticipated in the Old.
• • • • •
Graham: Well those eight that got on the boat weren’t that good,
you remember. Ham wasn’t too virtuous, and his father hadn’t taken
the temperance pledge yet. Those eight weren’t saved because they
were good. I believe they were saved because they got on the boat. But
we can’t compare that with the salvation at the end. It’s not quite the
same. The Flood was an emergency measure. At the end, God knows
who is safe to save.
Lou: Was there not enough evidence in Old Testament times for
people to recognize God’s true character, or did they have to wait for
the New Testament in order to understand?
Graham: Oh, I like that question very much. When you read all the
way through, the picture of God in the Old Testament is the same as in
the New. It’s the same God, the same Spirit communicating, the same
Christ leading them in the wilderness. What impresses me in the Old
Testament is how well people did know Him. God’s best friends in the
Bible are in the Old Testament. The man that Paul uses to suggest what
God wants most in us was Abraham, from the Old Testament (Romans
4; Galatians 3). Moses is called a friend of God (Exodus 33:11). And look
at Job, Hosea, Amos, Jeremiah, and Isaiah. Apparently the message in
the Old Testament is clear enough for some people, at least, to get it. In
fact, Jesus grew up with the Old Testament and learned the truth about
His Father from it. So I think the Old Testament is magnificently clear,
but only when it is read as a whole. I find no break between the Old and
the New, except that in the New, Christ is here in human form to confirm everything that has been described and anticipated in the Old. Even
His Sermon on the Mount is already in the Old Testament (see Exodus
20:17 and Psalm 51 as examples). So the Bible is a complete package, all
sixty-six books.
Lou: Let’s take two or three questions that are slightly different.
“You spoke about sanctification. What is this? If we sincerely accept
Jesus as our Savior, how can we ever be lost? Once we are saved, aren’t
we always saved?”
Graham: “Sanctification” is, of course, one of those heavy Latin
terms. I prefer to use “set right” and “keep right,” rather than “justify”
and “sanctify.” We can understand those words. Putting it in that way,
one can be set right with God, and one can be kept right for quite a
while, but one is still free to leave. And Lucifer proved that by leaving.
He was right with God before he left. There was no rebellion in heaven
at the beginning. And so, a million years into eternity, we may have been
right with God for a long time, but we are still free to go.
The once saved, always saved idea belongs to a very legal model.
I’ve been paid up, and I’m still paid up, and I have a right to be there.
I’d rather say that I’m only safe to have around if I’m willing to listen,
to trust God, and to accept instruction. And I’ll always be free to turn
into a rebel. That makes it even more wonderful that God’s children will
choose to remain loyal. Then their loyalty means something. Their
expression of love to God means something. They haven’t been reprogrammed. They haven’t been turned into robots. The price that God has
had to pay to settle the questions indicates how absolutely opposed He
is to programming us and making it impossible for us to go some other
way. God took quite a risk, but evidently freedom means that much to
God.
Lou: Graham, here are a couple of questions that are somewhat
related. “If God is a God of love and acceptance, why then did He
demand animal sacrifices? Couldn’t the children of Israel just have asked
for forgiveness rather than going through that sacrificial ceremony?”
And let me tie that together with another one. Someone writes about
their daughters who are now eighteen and twenty-two. They have been
vegetarians since they were young because they love animals too much
to have them killed for their benefit. But they run into trouble when
they go to the Old Testament, because there you have the sacrifices for
God’s benefit. “We know it has something to do with the sacrifice of
Jesus, but why does God have to be appeased by poor little animals
dying?”
Graham: There’s a lot implied in there. But who is the One who
sees the little sparrow fall (Matthew 10:29)? I mean, if it upsets these
daughters, how do you think it upsets the Lord? And yet He gave that
whole sanctuary system. It must have been important for Him to do it.
These questions are important enough that we have a whole chapter on
what I call “God’s Emergency Measures” (Chapter Eleven). Things like
the sanctuary and the Flood were serious emergency measures because
there was a serious emergency on this earth. We see God pointing to a
larger picture in the prophets. “I don’t really want your sacrifices apart
from the meaning. I hate them” (based on Amos 5:21–22 and Hosea 6:6).
Think of all the blood and all the suffering! God loves the animals.
And yet to make a very important point, He asked Adam and Eve to kill
that first lamb. So we need to consider carefully the meaning of these sacrifices. Because if we just learn about them and don’t think of the meaning, we are as ceremonial as the people in the Old Testament who missed
the point. So we must ask all the way through, how could God do something which He Himself did not like? And yet it needed to be done, and
we will revisit that in future chapters.
One more thing, I heard the word “appease” in one of those questions. Were these sacrifices to appease God in some way, to make Him
more favorable toward us? One could get that impression from the word
“propitiation” in some translations of Romans 3:25. The word “propitiation” suggests appeasement, a gift offered to change a god’s mind. But
that’s not the word that’s there in the original. That’s a regrettable
translation. “God was in Christ, reconciling the world to Himself” (2
Corinthians 5:19). Nobody had to win Him to our side. So the implications of that are well worth some serious study, and in the chapters on
God’s Emergency Measures (Chapter Eleven) and on why Jesus had to
die (Chapter Eight), we will have an opportunity to deal with those
thoroughly.
Lou: Here’s a question that speaks poignantly to where many of us
hurt and wonder. “‘The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life’ (Romans 6:23). I have a cousin, age thirty years, who has a malignant brain tumor; and he is awaiting death. There is nothing medically
that can be done for him. Everyone tells him, ‘God’s will be done.’ Now
the question is, does God will for one to die? I don’t think so. I believe
that sin has contaminated the world and as a result we have disease and
death. So please elaborate on this concept, and what’s more, what do you
say to such a person? How do you talk about God’s will?”
Graham: That’s too sad for a snap answer. I think at times like that
we draw from everything we’ve learned and experienced about God
through the years. We need to fall back on the things we are sure of. One
thing I am sure of, God wants us to be well. He created us perfect.
Disorder, disease — these are not of His doing. These are all part of being
caught up in the consequences of this revolt. But we also know that God
could heal, that’s true. And if He doesn’t seem to be healing at this time,
we might wonder why. And it’s OK to wonder why. There is abundant
evidence in Scripture that God is not offended when we ask why, not for
a moment!
But why is God willing for this person to die? Is He a destructive
God? An experience like this really tests the kind of person we believe
our God to be. But even when things are not too clear, if one has learned
that prayer is conversation with God as with a friend, then those who are
wondering feel perfectly free to kneel down and really talk to God about
this. We can say, “God, this is not clear. It looks as if You are like this,
but that’s the Devil’s picture of You.” Or, “It looks as if You are like
that. You couldn’t be, could You? Or are You?” God would not be
offended by such questions. He honors our questions. There is great
peace that comes from realizing we have a God toward whom we can
direct such questions, even in times of great agony. Whatever it takes,
learn the good news about God. And there’s one more thing I am sure
of, if the Lord were visible in your moment of suffering, how sympathetic He would be! More than anything else He would want to clear up the
impression that He is the cause of that suffering.
Lou: Here’s a related question: “Can you give a reason why a loving
God would allow a good Christian woman to be murdered? She was a
good help in her small church. The last Sabbath of her life they had a consecration service at the church. She dedicated herself anew to God, and
she was murdered that afternoon at her house. She was the treasurer,
and she had money at her house, and apparently that was the reason that
someone broke in and she was killed. The reason I know about this is
that she was my sister.”
Graham: Again, happy is the person who knows God very well at
a time like this. It doesn’t mean that we would know the specific answer
to the situation. I don’t think Job ever found out why those awful
things happened to him. All he knew was that his theologian friends
were wrong. They came to Job and said, “You cannot be asking God
about this.” Job was crying to God with intense feeling and saying,
“God, how can You do this to me? I’ve been Your good friend all this
time, and now You won’t even speak to me (Job 13:22, 24). You won’t
explain this.” And his friends kept repeating their legalistic explanations, none of which were helpful. Finally Job said, “I wish you brethren
would be quiet. I appreciate your coming, but you’re not helping me at
all. If only I could talk to God, I’m sure I could clear this up” (Job 16:2;
31:35). Eventually the boldness of his inquiries reached such a level that
those three men were worried that God would surely zap him on the
spot for daring to inquire. Instead, God broke in and said, “Job, you have
said of Me what is right” (based on Job 42:7).
So if a person is wrestling with a tragedy like this, we may not find
out why. I’m sure we won’t find out the answer to every unfair thing
that happens on this planet during this emergency. But some things we
know for sure; the kind of person God is, and His willingness to receive
our questions. He welcomes us to lodge our inquiries with feeling, and
hopefully we will trust Him enough to wait for the answer. And I’d like
to think that that sister was such a saint you don’t need to worry about
her. She will arise in the resurrection and say, “What am I doing here?”
She will have no complaints. She’ll be looking for her sister.
In the next chapter we will deal with the whole question
of authority, which is really the essence of the Great Controversy. God
is infinite in authority and power, but He would never think of intimidating or overwhelming us.
