Chapter Fifteen
Talking to God as a Friend
If the Father were to appear visibly among us, how would we address
Him? What language would we use? Would we be too afraid to speak?
Would we feel constrained to mention only the most lofty themes, or
would we be free to talk candidly about what He already knows is in our
hearts? Would it be easier to discuss such matters with the Son? Would
it be more appropriate to speak or listen? How does one listen to the
voice of God?
As you can see, our topic in this chapter is the meaning and purpose of prayer. As with all the topics in our conversations, the way we
pray depends upon the kind of person we believe our God to be. Surely
no one knew better how to talk to God than the Son of God Himself,
the one we call Jesus. In the Sermon on the Mount, you recall, He gave
some very clear advice as to how to pray:
When you pray, do not be like the hypocrites; they love to say
their prayers. . . for everyone to see them. . . . But when you pray, go into
a room by yourself, shut the door, and pray to your Father who is
there in the secret place. . . . In your prayers do not go babbling on like
the heathen, who imagine that the more they say the more likely they
are to be heard. . . . Your Father knows what your needs are before you
ask him. This is how you should pray: “Our Father in heaven, thy
name be hallowed; thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as in
heaven. Give us today our daily bread. Forgive us the wrong we have
done, as we have forgiven those who have wronged us. And do not
bring us to the test, but save us from the evil one.” Matthew 6:5–13,
NEB.
• • • • •
The way we pray depends upon the kind of person we
believe our God to be.
• • • • •
If God already knows our needs before we ask Him, why should we
take time to pray at all? That question assumes, of course, that the primary purpose of prayer is to lodge our requests with the Lord. But there
are others who prefer to understand prayer as conversation with God as
with a friend. It’s in the biblical record that the Son of God Himself
engaged in many such conversations with His Father. We are told: “He
went up into the hills by himself to pray” (Matthew 14:23, RSV), often
after a very busy day. “All night he continued in prayer to God.” Luke
6:12, RSV.
• • • • •
If God already knows our needs before we ask Him, why
should we take time to pray at all?
• • • • •
Have you ever prayed all night? How could Jesus pray to His Father
all night long without a certain amount of repetition? Do you think Jesus
babbled on like the heathen, supposing that the more He said the more
likely His Father was to hear Him? That would be inconceivable, wouldn’t it? Or were His conversations with His Father so real that the night
hours simply slipped away? Haven’t you had the experience of visiting
with a friend of whom you are especially fond, and the hours just flew
away? You see, everything depends on whether or not God is our friend.
The way we pray reveals to others, and to ourselves, the kind of person
we believe and understand our God to be.
Talking with God Face to Face
Imagine the Father appearing visibly at the front of your church, or
even better, in a cozy fellowship room. A group would gather around
Him there, just as the crowds did around Jesus. Suppose we could talk
there freely with God the Father for a whole hour. Would it be appropriate at the end for someone among us to rise and say, “This has been such
a special occasion, don’t you think we ought to close this meeting with
a word of prayer?” Or would it be correct to understand that, having just
been in conversation with our God as with a friend, we have been praying the whole hour long?
Or could such a conversation only be possible with Jesus the Son?
Is it even thinkable that we could converse with the Father, the
Awesome One, as with a friend? The disciples wondered about this.
They were comfortable with Jesus, and appreciated how He wanted
them to regard themselves as His friends. He said this more than once.
One of those places is John 15:15, RSV: “I have called you friends. . . .”
Their friendship with Jesus prompted Phillip to say, “Could the Father
be like You?” John 14:8. You may remember Jesus’ answer: “If you really
knew me, you would know my Father as well. . . . Anyone who has seen
me has seen the Father.” John 14:7, 9, NIV.
Marvelous as that is, I think much of our theology and worship fails
to recognize that magnificent truth, to know the Son is to know the
Father. That is why Jesus went on to say those stunning words, hardly
ever incorporated into Christian theology: “There is no need for Me to
pray to the Father for you, for the Father loves you Himself” (based on
John 16:26–27). Notice Goodspeed’s translation of the same text: “I do
not promise to intercede with the Father for you, for the Father loves
you himself.”
How hard it has been for God to convince us that He really is our
Friend. Centuries ago, when He came to speak to the people on Mount
Sinai, they were so terrified (Exodus 19:16) that they said to Moses,
“Don’t let God speak to us, lest we die” (Exodus 20:19). But Moses stood
there in the midst of all the thunder and lightning and said to the people,
“There is no need to be afraid” (Exodus 20:20). You see, all those centuries before Christ, Moses already understood the truth that John
wrote about: “There is no fear in love; perfect love drives out all fear. So
then, love has not been made perfect in anyone who is afraid, because
fear has to do with punishment.” 1 John 4:18, GNT.
• • • • •
Much of our theology and worship fails to recognize this
magnificent truth; to know the Son is to know the Father.
• • • • •
If you were ushered right now into the presence of God, would you
be afraid He might hurt you? That He might hit you? Do you trust Him
with His almighty power? On the day that every one of us approaches
God, the way we approach Him will reveal the kind of person we are
persuaded He really is. With this series of conversations in mind, then,
let’s go back with renewed courage to the imaginary fellowship room
where God is waiting. Whether the One there is Father, Son, or Holy
Spirit should make no difference to us. For Paul said in Romans 8 that all
three are on our side, all three are our Friends.
Now as we walk into the room, we know that God is the all-powerful Creator of the whole vast universe. We know that the mighty
angels, sinless as they are, stand overwhelmed with awe and wonder at
the majesty and glory of God. Nevertheless, if we are afraid to go in,
God has failed to convince us of the truth about Himself. And Jesus has
also failed to convince us, not just with His words, but with what He
has demonstrated to be true when He was here: God is infinitely powerful, but equally gracious, and there is no need to be afraid. And so, overwhelmed with awe, we venture to go inside.
• • • • •
God is infinitely powerful, but equally gracious, and there
is no need to be afraid.
• • • • •
God is seated there and we gather around Him. What should we
say? Should one of us be the first to speak? Once we have started speaking, would we talk all the time? Or would we let God speak now and
then? Normally, when we pray we do all the talking, don’t we? And
when we’re done, we say “Amen” and go about our business, or go to
sleep. That kind of prayer would be like meeting in a room with our
heavenly Father, talking to Him incessantly for several minutes, and
then saying, “Amen, thank You very much,” and then leaving. It wouldn’t make sense if He were there, would it? It certainly wouldn’t be the
kind of conversation one has with a friend.
How to Converse with God
Conversation means at least two people speaking. But how do we
converse with God when we can’t see Him because of the present emergency? In this emergency situation, He does not reveal Himself visibly to
us, for our sakes. This is why the Bible is called the Word of God — it is
God speaking to us. If we wish to hear God speak, except in extraordinary circumstances, He speaks to us through the Bible. We speak to Him
in prayer. Truly, as someone has said, “We commune with God through
the study of the Scriptures.”
I certainly find prayer much more meaningful while reading the
Bible. Have you ever had the experience of talking to God while reading
certain parts of the Scriptures? I often find myself saying out loud,
“That’s magnificent!” Who am I talking to at that moment? That’s real
conversation. We read and we listen in that way. And then we talk back
to God.
Going back to the imaginary fellowship room, our heavenly Father
waits and we begin to speak. What language should we use? Should we
look at our heavenly Father respectfully and say, “We prithee Lord that
Thou wouldst bestow unctions upon us from on high”? I think He
would smile sweetly and say, “Please relax, you can talk a little more
plainly if you wish.” Unless of course, you are used to talking that way
all the time. But did the disciples talk to God that way? Did Moses? Did
Abraham? No, they all used up to date, everyday speech. They wanted
to be clear. It was the language of their times.
I believe if we began to speak to God in that fellowship room, we
would surely be reverent, yet we would be conversing with a friend and
should use the kind of language we would use with our closest friends.
Just what that should be is a personal preference. But surely we would
use the best possible language to clarify our convictions, our feelings, our
desires, our admirations, and our worship. The important thing is to converse with our heavenly Father as with a friend.
So what language would you use? Jesus addressed His Father as
“Abba, Father” (Mark 14:36). Abba is the Aramaic word for “father.” So
it is almost like saying, “Father, Father,” although it is a term of endearment. Some versions translate “Abba, Father” as “Dear Father,” the way
some of us like to start our prayers. Paul urges us to do the same in
Romans 8:15 and Galatians 4:6. He says that when the Spirit of Truth
dwells within us, we will address the Father as “Dear Father.”
But most importantly, what would you talk about? Would you take
time on such a precious occasion to say, “Thank You, God, for today’s
groceries and here is my list for tomorrow, amen,” and then go on about
your business? Or would you say, “Bless the missionaries as they carry
the truth to the far-flung corners of the earth”? The Lord might say,
“How sweet. How is it that you only think of these things when you are
praying?” Of course, if you are the mother of a missionary, it would be
appropriate for you to talk to God about your loved ones. But if we only
think about missionaries when we talk to God, why do we talk about
them and not the things we have really been thinking about all day?
You see, those well-worn phrases we think we ought to use when
we pray, might seem rather empty when we are talking face to face with
God. Suppose one of us left the meeting and walked with God through
a garden nearby, wouldn’t it be natural to comment to God about the
beauty and fragrance of a rose, and the beautiful sounds of the mockingbird? Or the lovely, lonely sound of the mourning dove? Couldn’t we
tell Him how beautiful it was of Him to create things that way? Or
would we simply say, “We thank Thee, Lord, for the beauties of nature
that surround us”? We do have such well-worn phrases to cover these
things. It seems to me that if God really were our Friend, we would take
time to talk about these everyday things, and to be as specific about them
as we would be with other members of the family. We might even venture to ask Him about the thorns on a rose. “Did You put them there? If
so, why?”
Confrontation Is Part of Friendship
Is it all right to ask questions of our God? Job certainly did. He
boldly, reverently, agonized with God — to the consternation of his
friends. They worried that God would smite Job down for daring to talk
to the Father like this. In a way, the whole book of Job is on this subject.
Note what Job says in the following excerpts:
If only my life could once again be as it was when God watched
over me. God was always with me then. . . . And the friendship of God
protected my home. . . . I call to you, O God, but you never answer; and
when I pray, you pay no attention. Job 29:2–4; 30:20, GNT.
How that worried Job’s friends! But was God offended? No, to the contrary. God later said to the three friends: “You did not speak the truth
about me, the way my servant Job did.” Job 42:7, GNT. You see, Job
knew God and he honored God with those cries. But God was not talking to him just then. And Job was deeply upset, because their friendship
seemed to be at an end. So what upset Job’s friends actually complimented God, and spoke well of their relationship.
Surely there are serious questions we also could ask about God.
Think of the accidents that happen, sometimes to the best people among
us. Did that person’s guardian angels relax their protection? Serious
questions about God often arise when people are dying or seriously ill.
Why is it that God sometimes does not heal His trusting friends, even
though we ask Him to? I believe that God, as we know Him, might well
say to us, “Trust Me. I can’t explain it to you just now. I hope that you
will trust Me enough to wait for the day when I can make it plain to you.
I hope you have found enough evidence and enough reason for trusting
Me that much. Besides, you know I would never allow you to be tried
and tested more than you are able to bear.” Paul expressed this clearly
later on: “God can be depended on not to let you be tried beyond your
strength.” 1 Corinthians 10:13, Goodspeed. Or as he said in Romans: “We
know that in all things God works for good with those who love him. . .
.” Romans 8:28, GNT.
If we trusted God enough to really listen, then we might hear God
provoke the questions Himself. Think about how God provoked His
friend Abraham as He was on His way down to Sodom and Gomorrah
to consume those cities. He said, “I wouldn’t do this without first telling
My friend, Abraham.” In response Abraham dared to reason with his
God: “Then Abraham drew near, and said, ‘Wilt thou indeed destroy
the righteous with the wicked? . . . Far be that from thee! Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right?’” Genesis 18:23, 25, RSV. Have you ever
dared to say something like that to God? Was God offended by what
Abraham said? No: “Abraham was called God’s friend.” James 2:23,
GNT.
And that’s just one of the places in the Bible where God is
addressed in such a way. You may remember how God spoke to Moses,
another of His friends. He essentially said, “I am sick and tired of these
people [the Israelites]. Step aside and let Me destroy them” (based on
Exodus 32:9-10). But look at how Moses responds to God:
Then the Egyptians will hear of it. . . . The nations who have heard
thy fame will say, “Because the Lord was not able to bring this people
into the land which he swore to give to them, therefore he has slain
them in the wilderness.” Numbers 14:13, 15–16, RSV.
In this passage Moses showed his jealousy for God’s reputation.
Was God offended by this? No: “The Lord would speak with Moses
face-to-face, just as a man speaks with a friend.” Exodus 33:11, GNT.
Now, one would need to know God very well to talk to God like this.
And surely Moses and Abraham knew God well. You recall how even
Peter once dared to say “No” to God. In fact, he did it three times in his
vision of the unclean animals (Acts 10:5–16). “There came a voice to him,
‘Rise, Peter; kill and eat.’ But Peter said, ‘No, Lord.’” Acts 10:13–14,
RSV. Did God rebuke Peter for doing that? No, this is the kind of relationship that God desires to have with us, His children.
Being Honest with God
When we have such a relationship, prayer simply cannot be a trite
formality, it is honest conversation about the things that matter the most
to us. Above all, the conversation must be honest, or it isn’t real friendship after all. Suppose there’s a Brother Jones working near you who is
irritating you to death and that night you kneel and say, “Oh Lord, do
bless Brother Jones. Thou knowest how I love him.” If you listen closely
you might hear God say, “That’s very sweet. But, why don’t you tell
Me the truth? You hate the ground he walks on. And if you would only
just admit it, maybe I could begin to help you. But so long as you pretend, there is not much I can do.”
When King David was depressed, he said so:
Will the Lord spurn forever, and never again be favorable? Has
his steadfast love for ever [sic] ceased? Are his promises at an end for
all time? Has God forgotten to be gracious?. . . And I say, “It is my
grief that the right hand of the Most High has changed.” Psalm 77:7–
10, RSV.
David said that to God in prayer. Of course, that is only the first half of
the psalm. You will find at the end of the seventy-seventh Psalm how
David resolved his depression (Psalm 77:11–20). But if David wanted
vengeance, he wouldn’t say, “Lord, Thou knowest how I love Brother
Isaac, and I hope his crops will flourish this year,” when really David
wished that the blood of Brother Isaac would flow down the street and
would water the furrows of his field and the locusts would consume his
crops! So David would kneel and say something like, “Lord, Thou knowest my thoughts anyway, so why should I pretend?” Based on Psalm
139:1–12. Then he would continue:
O that thou wouldst slay the wicked, O God. . . . Do I not hate
them that hate thee, O Lord? And do I not loathe them that rise up
against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them my enemies. Search me, O God, and know my heart! Try me and know my
thoughts! And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in
the way everlasting. Psalm 139:19, 21–24, RSV.
In this passage David invited healing. He knew he needed a new heart
and a right spirit, truth in the inner man. So first he presented himself
honestly to God. He said, “You know all my thoughts anyway. So, why
should I hide? You know how I feel. So search me and may my thoughts
and the meditations and the words of my mouth be acceptable to You.”
If you should watch a loved one die, and you should cry, “Why
God? Why?” would God be offended? Or would the God you know
reach down and put an arm around your shoulder and say, “I understand
how you feel. You wouldn’t be human if you didn’t feel that way.
Someday I’ll make it plain to you. I wish I could right now. But please
trust Me, and trust Me enough to be willing to wait.” But, you see, we
have to know God well before those emergencies arise, so that we can
trust Him and pray to Him like this.
• • • • •
Prayer in its very essence is thinking toward God. It
means that God is at the very center of our thoughts.
• • • • •
Paul assures us that the Holy Spirit will help us pray: “Likewise the
Spirit helps us in our weakness; for we do not know how to pray as we
ought. . . .” Romans 8:26, RSV. And so the Holy Spirit brings the truth
about God to us. He helps us to see that truth and to be convinced about
it. He helps us see the truth about ourselves, and learn how to tell that
truth to our gracious heavenly Father. And then God can do good things
for us. Paul even said we should pray without ceasing: “Never stop praying.” 1 Thessalonians 5:17, Norlie. Or as Goodspeed translates it: “Never
give up praying.” But if we should spend all our time on our knees, we
would never get anything else done. So how can one pray without ceasing and still be effective in this life? To put it simply, prayer in its very
essence is thinking toward God. It means that God is at the very center
of our thoughts. Eventually it becomes a habit that God should be at the
very center of all our plans, always.
When we see God face to face one day, will that be the end of
prayer? Could prayer be yet another of the emergency measures that
keep the channels of communication open between God and His children, until the time comes when there will be no need for emergency
measures anymore? What do we mean when we sing, “Farewell,
farewell, sweet hour of prayer”? Do we mean “Farewell, farewell, I will
never talk to You again, God”? No, if prayer is conversation with a
friend, then when we meet God face to face, the hour of prayer will have
just begun.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: It seems to me that this topic comes under the
heading of what we could call “Practical Godliness.” You have been talking about our daily walk with God and practical Christianity. And people have a lot of questions about such things. These questions are not
theoretical. They really address how we go about living our lives. The
first question has to do with the wording of the Lord’s Prayer, the version you quoted didn’t sound familiar. “If we’re going to pray the Lord’s
Prayer, shouldn’t we use the words that Jesus gave us instead of some
new translation like this?”
Graham Maxwell: Well, if we were to use the words that Jesus
used, we would have to speak in Aramaic.
Lou: But King James English is so familiar to us, Graham. It’s so
ingrained in our lives and in the worship of all Christian churches.
Graham: I think there’s a very important lesson in this. We are
most familiar with the version of the Lord’s Prayer recorded in Matthew
(6:9–13). But the version recorded in Luke (11:2–4) is the version He gave
to His disciples when they came and said, “Teach us to pray.” The two
are similar, but they have interesting differences, and that’s the point.
As the Preface to the King James Version says, “The Kingdom of God is
not words and syllables; it’s the great ideas.” You can translate those into
any language. So it’s the meaning of the Lord’s Prayer that counts and
not the precise words.
Lou: So this isn’t a prayer to be repeated over and over?
Graham: I don’t think we can pray it too often if it’s a meaningful
experience. But the danger is, we can go from “Our Father” to “Amen”
and not even remember what we have said in between, because we’ve
done it so often.
Lou: That leads to another question: Why is this called the Lord’s
Prayer?
Graham: The title is just tradition, that’s all. It’s called the Pater
Noster in the Latin. “Pater” in Latin means “father,” and “noster” means
“our.” Our Father. Actually, Jesus prayed other prayers that could be
called the Lord’s Prayer. For example, that magnificent chapter 17 in
John, when in the hearing of His disciples He prayed to the Father. Now
that’s really the Lord’s Prayer.
Lou: It might be better to say this is “our” prayer, the one He
gave to us.
Graham: Yes. That’s right.
Lou: In many translations, the prayer seems to end abruptly. Those
great words, “for thine is the Kingdom, and the power and the glory,”
are left out (Matthew 6:13, KJV — compare the ESV, RSV and NIV).
Graham: That’s because in the early manuscripts of Matthew it’s
not there. And it isn’t in any manuscripts of Luke. So apparently when
the Lord actually gave the “Lord’s Prayer,” it ended with, “Deliver us
from evil or the evil one.” But does that mean we should stop repeating
the doxology (a statement of praise) at the end? There’s a doxology in 1
Chronicles 29 that is four times as long as this one (1 Chronicles 29:10–
13). David prayed it himself. It’s simply magnificent. So if one wants to
be a purist when doing this, you could switch to 1 Chronicles 29 when
you come to the end of the Lord’s Prayer. It’s very biblical and it’s also
very beautiful. Personally, I like ending the prayer with a doxology.
Jesus on other occasions may well have done the same. So it’s a beautiful
custom to say the whole traditional prayer, as long as it’s meaningful and
we’re thinking about it.
Lou: There’s something in the Lord’s Prayer as we traditionally
use it that has puzzled me. In other churches they say, “Forgive us our
trespasses,” while some of us were brought up saying, “Forgive us our
debts as we forgive our debtors.” Which is right?
Graham: Actually, this was a problem in our home. Growing up in
England, it was always “trespasses.” When we moved to this country,
we learned “debts,” and the younger members of the family all changed,
but my father never did. So even when I took my children home, they
always knew, when praying with Grandpa, it was, “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.” But in my own
home it was, “Forgive us our debts,” and I don’t recall my children ever
making a mistake, although I’ve heard people in church sometimes fumble over this.
Lou: Where did the word “trespasses” come from? Is that a particular translation?
Graham: The English Book of Common Prayer was quite an influence on the way some of these things are phrased. I think of Handel’s
Messiah. “Why do the nations so furiously rage together?” You look in
vain for that in the King James Version. It comes out of The Book of
Common Prayer, I believe.
Lou: So maybe the word “trespasses” was used to avoid the idea
that debts had to do with a money problem, rather than sin.
Graham: I like the translation that adds “if we’ve wronged anyone.” The meaning is clear. And the variety of words helps us concentrate on the meaning. That’s the all-important thing.
Lou: Now in the New English Bible it says, “Save us from the evil
one.” The familiar version of that phrase is “deliver us from evil.”
What’s the difference between evil and the evil one?
Graham: The Greek is exactly the same. To be delivered from the
evil one is indeed to be delivered from evil; so it makes no difference.
Many versions prefer “the evil one.” It brings the Great Controversy to
mind rather vividly. But either way, the point is clear.
Lou: When we pray “lead us not into temptation,” what are we
really praying? Does that imply, “God, be careful; please don’t get me
into temptation”? Would God really want to do that?
Graham: It helps to know that the word “temptation” here actually means trial or testing. Some versions have, “Lead us not into hard testing.” The idea that God would tempt is unthinkable; James deals with
this (James 1:13–15). He tells us that when we’re tempted, we shouldn’t
even blame the Devil. “You are led away by your own lusts and enticements” (based on James 1:14). Certainly don’t blame God. He wouldn’t
do any such thing. So “lead us not into temptation” cannot mean,
“Please, don’t You tempt us,” but, “Lead us not into difficult trials.”
Jesus prayed something similar in Gethsemane. He said there, “Remove
this cup from Me, if possible” (based on Matthew 26:39). I don’t think
we should pray, “Lord, I’m ready for it. Bring on the trials; I feel very
strong today.” I believe we should say, “Lord, in all humility, don’t bring
me into trial; nevertheless, Your will be done.”
“Lead us not into testing” must be coupled with, “Nevertheless,
Your will be done.” Jesus did it in Gethsemane, and we do it in the
Lord’s Prayer. The Lord’s Prayer and the prayer in Gethsemane are very
similar in a number of respects. So I think the prayer in Gethsemane
helps us to understand the Lord’s Prayer.
Lou: We’ve explored talking to God as with a friend. Yet I can still
remember the shock I felt when in a public prayer a seminary student
spoke to God with a familiar “You.” I wondered at the time if this young
man had lost his way. But really, when we come to church, we usually
put on special clothes, something that’s just a little different than other
times, out of respect. Isn’t there an analogy here perhaps as to the kind
of language that we ought to use when we talk to God? He is our Friend,
but we still want to show respect for His majesty. What about that?
Graham: It’s true that many of us dress in a special way when we
come to church. But I don’t see us wearing antique clothing. And so,
when we come into the presence of God, I believe we should use the best
words we know to express ourselves. We should be reverent and respectful, to be clear, but it doesn’t mean we use old-fashioned words.
Lou: But isn’t reverence and respect the purpose of the “Thees”
and “Thous?”
Graham: I believe that has come to be true for many, but I think
people need to realize why they are doing it. The Thees and the Thous
and the wists and the wots are the way English was spoken in those days.
Folks can look at the Preface to the King James Version and notice that
the language there is the same. Actually, if the garbage collector came in
those days, you might say, “We salute thee, thou gatherer of refuse, and
we prithee that thou wouldst place yonder vessel ere.” That’s how you
would speak to the garbage man. That’s the way you talked to everybody back then. But today people say about our common speech, “Well,
that’s no way to talk to God.” But King James English was simply the
common language of the day. It’s beautiful language, but it was not special at that time. Forty years ago I was explaining that there’s no basis
in the original language for using Thee and Thou and wist and wot. Yet
I still find myself saying Thee and Thou when praying in public. These
words have become a symbol of something, so I’m still doing it.
Lou: What words do you use in your personal prayer?
Graham: I often say “You,” and I’m comfortable with that. But I
must say, I like the way you pray. You say “You” to God, but you say it
very reverently; it’s in the tone of your voice. It’s in your choice of
words. So I feel it’s very reverent. I’m accustomed to Thee and Thou in
public prayer, and there are a number of people I feel might be a little
distressed if I switched. I don’t want words to be a barrier. But maybe
I’m just getting too old to shift.
Lou: Well, I’ve gone through my own struggle with that, and it
strikes me that I really made the change after I came here to Loma Linda.
Even here I wondered how the congregation would feel.
Graham: I think the important thing is: “Rend your heart and not
your garments” (Joel 2:13). If the reverence is in your heart, the language
is not the important thing. I want words to be my servant, and I want
to use them with care. I’m ready to change as need be.
Lou: The crucial thing is that prayer is talking to God as to a friend.
Graham: Language mustn’t stand between us and our God.
Lou: We must move on. Let’s talk about the phrase, “Thy will be
done.” If we really want God’s will to be done, why ask for anything?
Wouldn’t it be more trusting to just say, “God, do what You’re going to
do”?
Graham: Jesus is our example in almost every important area. He
would say to His Father, “Let this cup pass from Me, nevertheless, . . .”
Matthew 26:39. If prayer is conversation with God, we will be honest
with Him. “I do not relish what’s coming. I want You to do things Your
way. I want to defer to Your wisdom. Nevertheless, may I talk to You
about this? May I tell You honestly that I want this, or I want that, I
shrink from this, or I shrink from that?” That’s real, honest conversation.
But behind it all, we are deferring to God’s wisdom. It’s genuine, honest
conversation.
Lou: But aren’t there people who feel it expresses a lack of faith to
say, “Thy will be done,” when you’re praying for a loved one that you
very much want to be healed? Wouldn’t it be more trusting to just say,
“Lord, heal. I believe You are going to”?
Graham: We do it that way because we want to tell Him what to
do. It shows much more trust to say, “God, You know best. Please do
what is best for this person.”
Lou: You’re saying that it’s perfectly all right to express my will
very forcibly, to tell God exactly what I want?
Graham: If I don’t, I’m not telling the truth. I want this person
to be well. But “Thy will be done” expresses even more trust. I love it
when the person you are praying for says, “Look, you don’t have to dictate to God. He doesn’t have to heal me for me to trust Him. I’m willing
for Him to do whatever is best, and you may pray that way.” Isn’t it
easy to pray around the bedside when the patient trusts God like that?
Lou: That’s true. But now let’s get down to even more practical
matters. Does it do any good to pray for a safe trip? If you pray, “Thy
will be done,” and then you have an accident, should you assume that
was what God had in mind for that trip?
Graham: I suppose it is good to pray for a safe trip as long as it isn’t
a presumptuous prayer. “Now that we’ve prayed, I can up the speed ten
miles an hour. You see, I’m guaranteed a safe trip, I prayed.” A good trip
prayer would be committing ourselves into God’s hands and also praying, “God, help me to drive more carefully. Help me to be more alert.
And Lord, whatever comes out of this, I have confidence that all will be
well.” Some people die on the way to camp meeting or church. Will they
awaken in the resurrection, see all the good things of eternity and say,
“Wait a minute, Lord. Am I in the Kingdom? This isn’t what I wanted.”
The Lord would say, “Aren’t you really happy to be here?” God guarantees to take care of us in the larger perspective, but He doesn’t say,
“No trouble, no sickness, no accidents on this planet.” That kind of
thinking is spiritually dangerous.
Lou: You’re not saying, then, that if an accident happens, it is
because God planned it out that way?
Graham: He could step in at any time to prevent accidents, but He
doesn’t. He’s trying to say something about the results of disorder in the
universe, how there’s an enemy abroad, and how He hopes we will bear
with Him and wait. And when we look back over all this, I believe we
will not wish to have been led in any other way than the one He has chosen. And He hopes we will trust Him enough to wait.
Lou: What about intercessory prayer, praying for others, does that
really do any good?
Graham: That’s a very good way to put the question. One reason
we pray is because we don’t want to miss out on any good thing that
God might have for us. We want to get our money’s worth, so to speak.
But that doesn’t sound to me like conversation with God as with a
friend. Let’s take an example, a mother with a son who has chosen to go
his own way. She loves her son, so every night she talks to God about
her son. If she didn’t, she wouldn’t be normal. She talks with God about
the things that are on her mind. She doesn’t say, “God, force my boy
back.” She knows that if God would pour out His Holy Spirit with one
hundred-fold greater intensity on her son, that alone would not make
him a Christian. He could still say, “No.” So she prays, “God, You choose
the time. You choose the way. Help me to be patient. Help me to do what
I can do, and maybe bring every influence possible to bear, but I know
my son can still say ‘No,’ just as Lucifer said ‘No’ to Your very face.”
I’m not going to say it does no good for her to talk to God. She’s going
to talk to Him anyway. This is her son. She’s going to talk to Him about
her son.
Lou: But what if there is a particular need? I remember years ago
there was a situation in one of the countries of Europe where people
were suffering persecution and doors to churches were being closed.
And we had a day of fasting and prayer. Did all of us joining together in
a special movement of prayer bring about a decision by God to intervene? Did it bring extra power into the situation?
Graham: If more of us twist God’s arm, are we more likely to get
what we want? Actually, I remember when that event occurred back in
the 1950s. A whole group of theology majors at Pacific Union College,
where I was at the time, said, “Let’s meet for lunch every Monday noon
and discuss intercessory prayer until we understand this process.” And
we finally agreed that, in the context of an enemy accusing God of
manipulating things, our united requests set God free to do things He
had been longing to do. When we all together said, “Please, open the
churches in Romania,” or wherever it was, God could say to the adversary, “Step aside. I’m on My way.” And He could say to the angels, “Is
this interference? Is this manipulation? Do you hear them all asking Me?”
I think the Great Controversy is very much involved here. I believe our
prayers set Him free to act, to say to the adversary, “Step aside, I’m
being asked to do this.” Our prayers really do make a difference. But even
if they didn’t, we should still pray, because prayer is how we talk to God
as to a friend.
Lou: What if we did the same thing for that lady’s son? If we all
prayed for his conversion, would God have to convert him?
Graham: If that happened, what would it say about God? If God
by force can keep His family together, how did He lose one-third of the
angels? I don’t believe God would ever overthrow the freedom of that
woman’s son.
Lou: In Romans 8 it says something about how the Spirit intercedes
for us with sighs too deep for words, or as the New International Version
puts it: “With groans that words cannot express” (Romans 8:26). What’s
happening there? What is the Spirit doing with God on our behalf?
Graham: Well, we need to consider that in line with John 16:26. If
there is no need for the Son to intercede with the Father for us, there’s
no need for the Holy Spirit to intercede with the Father for us either. All
three of Them are on our side. So this means that the Holy Spirit of
truth comes and helps us to pray by bringing us the truth about God,
that we might be encouraged to pray. He also tells us the truth about ourselves, so we can be honest with God and tell the truth about ourselves
as well. That’s prayer that makes a difference. So the Holy Spirit, when
we are struggling to find words, guides us into true conversation with
God as with a friend (Romans 8:26).1
Lou: I have heard a fairly well-known minister talk about how God
speaks to him. Now what about that? How do you judge that kind of
thing? When you speak about prayer as conversation with a friend, is
that ever a two-way conversation? What about God speaking back to us?
Can we talk more about that?
1 (JP) This surprising reading of Romans 8:26 is grounded in the Greek gender of the
text. The Holy Spirit is neuter in Greek (to pneuma) but the “wordless groans” are masculine (Greek: stenagmois alalētois). So it is our groans, not those of the Holy Spirit,
that the text is referring to!
Graham: When someone comes and says, “God spoke to me last
night,” I mustn’t be rude enough to say, “I think that’s a lie.” But I must
remember verses we considered in earlier chapters. One of these is about
the prophet who said, “The angel of the Lord has told me thus and so,
but he lied to him” (based on 1 Kings 13:18). So if this person says, “God
spoke to me last night and I bring you this message,” I must take that
message to the Scriptures and see if it measures up. For no matter who
it is that comes to me with a message from the Lord, though he may say,
“The Lord spoke to me last night,” I still must take that message to the
Scriptures. But if I’m taking that message to the Scriptures, then what
is the highest authority? Isn’t it the Scriptures? Then why not go
straight there? I believe God speaks to us primarily through the
Scriptures.
God has certainly spoken to individuals from time to time. And
we’ve taken some of those messages to the Bible, and they’ve measured
up. There is one such person you and I know especially well; what she
wrote measures up magnificently. That’s where the authority lies. I test
what she wrote by the Scriptures.
Lou: A couple more questions. Should we pray to the Father, the
Son and/or the Holy Spirit? Should we pray to all three?
Graham: I would say all three, as in the Doxology. There we praise
the Father, we praise the Son, and we praise the Holy Spirit.
Lou: What about praying in the name of Jesus? What is the significance of that?
Graham: I think it is significant that Jesus said, “Pray to the Father
in My name, and the Spirit will help you do it” (based on John 14:13–
14, 26; 15:26). I think that’s for historical reasons. You see, the Son is the
One who came to reveal the truth about the Father. The Spirit gives us
the record and brings the confirmation. And so to be in tune with the
whole history of the revelation, He says, “Pray to the Father, but in My
name.” “In My name” is not a magic formula, it’s simply saying, “I recognize that if Jesus had not come, I would not know You, I wouldn’t
have the courage to come. I wouldn’t know how to pray.” So, “in His
name” is a statement of gratitude and worship.
Lou: Can you say just a word about prayers that God says He
won’t hear? For example: “You spread forth your hands. I will hide My
eyes from you. Even though you make many prayers, I will not listen”
(Isaiah 1:15). What kind of prayers does God refuse to hear?
Graham: In the letters of John it says a similar thing (1 John 4:6).
God doesn’t listen to the prayer of hypocrisy, the prayer that really isn’t
asking for any help, the prayer that is cheating with God. Now He loves
the cheater and He loves the hypocrite. He simply cannot help them, and
so He says, “I will have to give you up.” Prayer must be honest. We must
walk humbly with our God and tell the truth. It’s the same way with a
physician — a physician cannot help a cheating patient who won’t tell
the truth.
Lou: The next chapter will be number sixteen in our series. What’s
our topic?
Graham: “God’s Last Pleading with His Children.” As some might
guess, we will be reviewing the Three Angels’ Messages in the setting
of the Great Controversy.
