Chapter Nine
There Is No Need to Be Afraid of God
If God were the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be;
arbitrary, vengeful and severe; there could be no real freedom, and our
worship and obedience would be driven by our fears. Sadly, millions
have been turned away from God by Satan’s perversion of the truth. But
Jesus came to bring the truth about God that sets us free, truth that
makes it possible for mere mortals to be His friends.
To be afraid of God is to misunderstand, even to deny, the truths
that He paid such a price to reveal. Though God is infinite in majesty
and power, He values nothing higher than the freedom of His intelligent
creatures. He desires that their love, their worship, their trust, their
willingness to listen, may be freely given. God not only prefers it that
way, He knows that if our love and trust are not freely given, there
would be no genuine freedom in His family. And God would rather die
(on the cross) than preside over a universe that is not free.
• • • • •
Though God is infinite in majesty and power, He values
nothing higher than the freedom of His intelligent creatures.
He desires that their love, their worship, their trust, their
willingness to listen, may be freely given.
• • • • •
Besides, God also knows that the obedience that springs from fear
will actually turn His children into rebels. As we have seen (Chapter
Eight), He has demonstrated this truth at great cost. Rebelliousness is
the very essence of sin. God sent His Son to do away with sin (Romans
8:3). But in order to do away with rebelliousness and distrust, He must
first do away with fear. It is fear that has turned so many away from God.
It is fear that has inspired rebelliousness even in the hearts of those who
seek to obey Him, but do not know Him well. God went to the cross in
Christ to make it eternally clear that there is no need for His children to
be afraid of Him. While He is infinite in power, He is also infinitely gracious. Surely such a God is worthy of our love, our reverence, our worship, and our willingness to listen and obey.
What Fear Does to Freedom
If God really were the kind of person His enemies have made Him
out to be; arbitrary, vengeful and severe; there would be no freedom
under His government. Any professions of love and trust on our part
would be compromised by our fears. How could God be satisfied with
expressions of love from children who are afraid? Would you parents be
satisfied with such expressions of love from your own children? When
you consider Satan’s perversion of the truth in this matter, it’s no wonder millions of people have turned away from God.
Satan has crafted a picture of God that has made God look even
more cruel than old King Nebuchadnezzar and his burning fiery furnace.
In the book of Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar built a very large idol and
ordered the nation’s leaders (Daniel 3:2) to bow down at a given signal
and worship his god. Anyone who refused to worship the image was to
be thrown into the burning fiery furnace. Readers of the story recoil in
horror at how Daniel’s three friends; Shadrach, Meshach and AbedNego; got caught up in such cruel tyranny. In the words of
Nebuchadnezzar, “You either submit to my god or I will throw you into
the burning fiery furnace” (based on Daniel 3:14–15).
Many, somehow, find it possible to accept a God who is described
as doing the very same thing as Nebuchadnezzar. They see God saying
to us, “On your knees, worship Me, or I’ll throw you into a burning
fiery furnace.” Actually, this portrayal of God makes Him even worse
than Nebuchadnezzar. Nebuchadnezzar was willing to settle for a simple
act of submission: “On your knees!” God asks for much more; our love
and our trust. He is caricatured as saying, “If you will not love and trust
Me, I will throw you into a burning fiery furnace. And I won’t burn you
as briefly as Nebuchadnezzar did. I will burn you forever and ever.” Does
that picture of God make sense? Is it acceptable? I love Ellen G. White’s
words on this. “Such thoughts destroy human reason” (based on Early
Writings, 219 and Life Sketches, 153).
Of course, gentle Jesus would never say such a thing, would He? So
is it the Father who is the fearsome One who would issue such a threat?
And if the Father is the fearsome member of the Trinity, is that why the
Son came to die? Was it to assuage, appease and propitiate the wrath of
the offended member of the Trinity? Is this why Jesus had to go up
quickly on resurrection Sunday — to intercede with the fearsome member of the Trinity? Could the Father never find it in His own heart to
forgive His rebellious children unless He were begged to do so by the
most sympathetic member of the Three? I hope no one reading this chap-
ter believes any of this! But can you see the impact our understanding of
the death of the wicked has on our picture of God? It also impacts our
understanding of the plan of salvation. That’s the reason for this chapter, to explain that there is really no need to be afraid of God.
There’s More Than One Kind of Fear
What, then, does the Bible mean when it says that we are supposed
to “fear” God and be His “God-fearing” people? You can even find that
word in the first of the Three Angels’ Messages: “Fear God and give
him glory, for the hour of his judgment has come.” Revelation 14:7,
RSV. Not only does this verse tell us to fear God, it even gives us a good
reason to fear Him, the Last Judgment. So before we go any further, we
need to understand the biblical meaning of the word “fear.” If you will
forgive the Greek, it’s pronounced phobos, from which we get the
English word “phobia.” But the biblical word doesn’t always mean terror. Sometimes it means respect or reverence: “Blessed is everyone that
feareth the Lord. Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.”
Psalm 128:1–2, KJV. Surely the Psalmist isn’t saying, “Happy is everyone who is scared of God.”
• • • • •
Where there is no respect there is no reverence, and very little learning can take place.
• • • • •
So the biblical word “fear” has another meaning. Blessed is everyone who reveres and respects the Lord. You will be happy if you do, and
it will be well with you. For example: “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” Proverbs 9:10, KJV. Does that mean that being terrified of God is the beginning of wisdom and learning? No, there again the
context determines the meaning of the word. So the translation in the
Good News Bible is to be preferred: “To be wise you must first have reverence for the Lord.”
Where there is no respect there is no reverence, and very little
learning can take place. Think of the lengths to which God has gone
through the centuries to gain people’s respect and to hold it long enough
to tell them more truth about Himself. Perhaps the most famous example
is the one provided at Mount Sinai. God came down to speak to His people. Did they all line up quietly to listen? No. They were noisy. They
were complaining. They were fussing about the food and the water.
There was no respect for God. So God could not speak to them softly
that day. Instead, there was thunder and lightning, fire, smoke, and an
earthquake. And God said to Moses: “Put a fence around that mountain.
Don’t let the people come too close to Me” (based on Exodus 19:12–13).
Today we sing “Nearer, Still Nearer,” but on that day no one wanted to
get close:
The people were afraid and trembled; and they stood far off, and
said to Moses, “You speak to us, and we will hear, but let not God
speak to us, lest we die.” And Moses said to the people, “Do not fear;
for God has come to prove you, and that the fear of him may be before
your eyes, that you may not sin.” Exodus 20:18–20, RSV.
Notice the use of the word “fear” with both meanings in the same
sentence. “Do not fear,” at the beginning of the sentence, means the same
thing as “there’s no need to be afraid.” But further on, “that the fear of
Him may be before you,” uses the word with the meaning of “reverence.” So the very same Hebrew word can carry different meanings in
the very same sentence. Notice also that Moses could stand in the middle
of the earthquake and the fire and say that there is no need to be afraid.
Why? Because he knew God, and he knew why God was raising His
voice on that occasion.
Why God Raises His Voice
We might ask, “Why didn’t God speak more softly?” We know that
He prefers to. That’s what He does when talking to His friends, as in the
still, small voice with Elijah at the mouth of the cave (1 Kings 19:12). But
when people are hard of hearing, God will raise His voice. And how
grateful we should be that He is willing to raise His voice when we need
it! Now did He speak too loudly at Mount Sinai? Did He terrify them
too much? I would say not. Forty days after the fire, the earthquake, the
lightning and the thunder died away, they were dancing drunk around a
golden calf in a fertility cult ritual (Exodus 32:1–20).
Surely those of us who have taught little ones, or have children of
our own, know how difficult it is to gain proper respect so that learning
might occur without fear. What a delicate thing it is to accomplish both!
Whenever God raised His voice, He got reverence, but there would also
be some terror. When He talked softly, they would despise Him, as later
generations despised gentle Jesus. So God has had to go back and forth
on this throughout history.
Imagine that you are a grade school teacher with forty years of
experience. In all those years, you have never raised your voice to your
little pupils. It is the last day of fall quarter, and there is a rap on the
door. The principal says, “The building is on fire. Please line up the
pupils and get them out the door.” So you step back into the room with
your usual dignity and in your usual quiet voice, you say, “Students, the
building is on fire. Please line up and we will go out that door.” But it is
the last day before Christmas vacation, it is the period after recess, and
there is a tumult in the room. The little ones don’t see you standing
there.
• • • • •
When people are hard of hearing, God will raise His voice.
And how grateful we should be that He is willing to raise
His voice when we need it!
• • • • •
Would you say at this point, “Well, I am not going to sully my reputation by shouting for the first time in forty years. I have given them a
chance. Let me just go home and save myself.” Or would you, dignified
you, be willing to shout to the students for the first time? What if, to
your horror, they still don’t notice you? Would you be willing to climb
up on the desk, throw the chalk and some erasers, until in terror the children finally see you? Then, once they have slipped into their seats and
you have slipped into yours, you say, “Children, don’t go home and tell
your mothers I am angry with you. I am not angry with you. I love you
and I don’t want you to be hurt. But the school building is on fire. So in
this quiet moment while I have your attention, would you quickly line
up the way we’ve practiced and go out that door?”
Now which approach shows greater love? Would it be not terrifying them briefly? Would it be not raising your voice? Or would it be better to run the risk of being feared? Wouldn’t it be better to be obeyed
for the wrong reason momentarily? It seems to me that God has taken
that risk over and over in Scripture. We should be prepared to say,
“Thank You God, for raising Your voice so many times. It must mean
that You really love us.”
Facing the Judgment
The first angel of Revelation 14 suggests a most serious reason why
we might become afraid. He says that the hour of God’s judgment has
come (Revelation 14:7). Those are awesome words that strike many people with fear. How thoroughly will we be judged? How much does God
know about us? Hebrews 4 suggests that He knows a lot: “There is nothing that can be hid from God; everything in all creation is exposed and
lies open before his eyes. And it is to him that we must all give an
account of ourselves.” Hebrews 4:13, GNT. Put that together with the
words of Solomon: “God is going to judge everything we do, whether
good or bad, even things done in secret.” Ecclesiastes 12:14, GNT.
How can you face judgment at the hands of Someone so well
informed and be unafraid? Well, unafraid of what and unafraid of whom?
The same John who warned us in Revelation 14:7 that the hour of God’s
judgment has come, is the one who explains how it is possible to face the
judgment without fear. In one of his letters, John uses the word “fear”
with the meaning of “terror in the face of the judgment.” But notice
what he does with that terror:
God is love, and whoever lives in love lives in union with God and
God lives in union with him. Love is made perfect in us in order that
we may have courage on the Judgment Day. . . . There is no fear in love;
perfect love drives out all fear. So then, love has not been made perfect
in anyone who is afraid, because fear has to do with punishment. 1
John 4:16–18, GNT.
John’s point is crystal clear. If we really know the truth about God,
there is no need to be afraid, even of the final judgment. And why is
that? Is it only because God has given all judgment to the Son? Notice
John 5: “The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the
Son.” John 5:22, RSV. Many find that comforting, because they feel they
are much more likely to receive merciful treatment at the hand of the Son
than of the Father. But is that true? I’ve heard some say with real gratitude, “I have no fear of the judgment because I know I have a Friend in
court.”
And I ask, “Who is that Friend?”
Then comes the warm response, “Why, Jesus, of course.”
“You mean the Father is no Friend of yours?”
“Oh, I didn’t mean that.”
“Then what did you mean when you said that you were happy to
have a Friend in court and Jesus is your Friend? Is the Father no Friend?
What of the Holy Spirit?”
Some derive comfort from the thought, as they consider the final
judgment at the hands of One who knows us in such detail, that Jesus
will be there interceding with the Father in our behalf. Does that mean
that the more Jesus pleads with the Father, the more likely we are to
receive merciful treatment? Think what that implies about the Father! Is
the Father less loving and less forgiving than the Son? Do we think that
He is exacting, unforgiving, and severe? Are we even willing, in expressing our doctrines, to support Satan’s charges against our God?
• • • • •
Whether we are judged by Father, Son, or Holy Spirit, we
have no need to be afraid of God.
• • • • •
Remember Jesus’ words to Philip: “If you had known me, you
would have known my Father also. . . . He who has seen me has seen the
Father.” John 14:7, 9, RSV. If you really knew this to be true, you
would never say, “I am grateful that Jesus is my Friend in court, rather
than the Father.” You couldn’t say that, could you? Remember Jesus’
words in John 16:26–27: “I need make no promise to plead to the Father
for you, for the Father himself loves you” (Phillips). Or as Goodspeed’s
translation puts the same text: “There is no need for me to intercede
with the Father for you.” According to Jesus Himself, the Son does not
love us more than the Father, or understand us better than the Father.
Neither is the Son more sympathetic than the Father. If we have seen
the Son, we have seen the Father.
According to Romans 8, all three members of the Godhead are for
us; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. If all of Them are for us,
then who is the one who is against us? Against whose charges do we
need to be defended (Romans 8:26–39)? You see, whether we are judged
by Father, Son, or Holy Spirit, we have no need to be afraid of God. But
that is not the only reason to be unafraid. When we understand how the
judgment is conducted and what determines whether we are saved or
lost, we will have even further evidence that we don’t need to be afraid.
How God Judges at the End
The Bible makes it plain that there is nothing arbitrary about the
judgment. There is no arbitrary standard by which we are measured.
There are no arbitrary decisions made. The choice is actually ours: “And
this is the judgment, that the light has come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light.” John 3:19, RSV. You see, if we have
turned down the truth, we have not been won to trust and we don’t
have a willingness to listen. Because of this, God has not been able to help
us and to heal us. We don’t have a new heart and a right spirit (Ezekiel
36:26). We are not the kind of people who would be safe to admit to the
hereafter. There is absolutely nothing arbitrary about that.
If any one hears my sayings and does not keep them, I do not
judge him. . . . He who rejects me and does not receive my sayings has a
judge; the word that I have spoken will be his judge on the last day.
John 12:47–48, RSV.
The sayings of Jesus are the truth and light that He brought to this
earth. While all judgment has been given to Him (John 5:22), there is
another sense in which He does not judge at all (John 8:15). You see, in
the end we are not judged by Jesus or God, we are judged by the truth.
It is a matter of Them simply diagnosing our condition. It is a consequence. It is a result. There is nothing arbitrary about it at all. And then
what God does to those who have turned down the truth (which means
He has not been able to heal them) is not arbitrary either. For what does
God do to those who reject the priceless truth about Him? What else can
He do in a free universe but sadly give them up? As we noticed in the
previous chapter: “Because they exchanged the truth about God for a lie.
. . . God gave them up to a base mind and to improper conduct.” Romans
1:25, 28, RSV. God sadly gives people up to the consequences of what
they have chosen to do. In the end-time judgment, God simply recognizes
the choices we have made, diagnoses our condition, and announces the
results.
 One day God will look at His people, some who have rejoiced in the
truth and some who have turned it down. On that day He will say these
awesome words, “Let him who does wrong continue to do wrong; let
him who is vile continue to be vile; let him who does right continue to
do right; and let him who is holy continue to be holy.” Revelation 22:11,
NIV. Just go on doing what you are doing. Go on being what you are.
There is nothing arbitrary about that. There is no need to fear God for
that reason. We have made our choice and we are reaping the results,
both good and bad.
How Sinners Die the Second Death
Having said this, doesn’t the Bible warn us that sinners will experience God’s wrath and be burned forever? How about Revelation 14?
“He also shall drink of the wine of God’s wrath . . . and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone . . . for ever and ever.” Revelation 14:10–
11, RSV. At first glance, that sounds like the fiery furnace of
Nebuchadnezzar all over again. Fortunately, the preceding sixty-five
books of Scripture have prepared us to understand this awesome language. As we saw in the last chapter (based on Romans 1:24–28 and
Hosea 11:7–8), God’s wrath is simply His turning away in loving disappointment from those who do not want Him anyway. This turning away
leaves them to the inevitable and awful consequence of their own rebellious choices. And as He lets them go, He cries, “How can I give you up?
How can I let you go?” Hosea 11:7–8.
• • • • •
God’s wrath is simply His turning away in loving disappointment from those who do not want Him anyway.
• • • • •
Revelation 14:10, however, uses the word “forever.” How long is
forever? Jude may be helpful. “Sodom and Gomorrah . . . serve as an example by undergoing a punishment of eternal fire.” Jude 1:7, RSV. That’s
another way of saying “forever fire,” but that fire went out millennia ago.
So “forever” in biblical terms need not last forever in today’s terms.
Also in Exodus 21:6, there is a reference to the servant who would serve
his master “forever,” but that “forever” might only last until the next
jubilee or, at most, as long as this life shall last. So we need to understand
the biblical meaning of forever. It offers no support for the eternally
burning fires of hell.
What about the fire itself? Many times in the Bible God’s glory, the
brilliance that surrounds His divine person, is described as having the
appearance of fire: “Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was
like a devouring fire on the top of the mountain. . . .” Exodus 24:17, RSV.
It wasn’t devouring fire. It looked like it. There are many other places
in Scripture where we find the glory that surrounds God is life-giving
glory. Adam and Eve could live in its presence. Lucifer used to, as he
walked among the stones of fire (Ezekiel 28:14). It is energizing, life-giving glory. It is only because we are, by our own choice, out of harmony
with God that what should be life-giving is destructive. God longs to
heal us and doesn’t want to lose a single one.
Someday, every one of us will come face-to-face with God, whether
we are saved or lost, at either the second or the third coming, on either
side of the Millennium. Do you think we will be afraid? What if we
should be among the lost on that day? We would look up and see Christ
there in His human form. Will He be angry with us? Or will He be crying, “Why will you die? How can I give you up? How can I let you go?”
Hosea 11:7–8. Like a physician, God is there, eager and ready to heal. But
He cannot force us to be well. If we do not trust Him, if we are not willing to listen, He cannot heal the damage done. What else can God do if
we have come to the place where we have persistently refused to listen,
or even rejected His offers? If we have refused to trust, we have refused
to let Him help us. What else can He do but sadly give us up? It will happen in the same way that He gave up His Son on the cross, and we will
die. Even in the death of the wicked there is no need to be afraid of God.
The choice is still ours.
• • • • •
It is the truth about God that makes it possible to die
unafraid. And every dying patient deserves to know that.
• • • • •
One reason many people are afraid to die is because they are afraid
of God. They know that when they die they will come face-to-face with
some Great Power. It is an awesome thing to meet God. Is it really possible to die unafraid of God? According to the Bible, yes. The mission of
Jesus is to “free those who all their lives were held in slavery by their
fear of death.” Hebrews 2:15, NIV. I believe that the fear of death is
actually the fear of God, the fear of the judgment. Is it possible to know
God well enough that one can die unafraid? “You will know the truth,
and the truth will set you free.” John 8:32, GNT. It is the truth about
God that makes it possible to die unafraid. And every dying patient
deserves to know that. People who know the truth about God can die
unafraid, knowing that in their next moment of consciousness they will
be in the presence of the kind of God we so much admire.
Just before Jesus Himself went out to die, He tried to sum up the
ideal quality of the relationship God desires to have with His children.
He said, “God wishes to deal with you as His friends.”
No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know
what his master is doing; But I have called you friends, for all that I
have heard from my Father I have made known to you. John 15:15,
RSV.
Jesus here contrasts servants with friends. The servant does not
know what his master is doing. The master gives orders and the servant
accepts and follows them without understanding why. But Jesus and
His Father want us to know and to understand Them as Friends. God
has had a few such friends through the years. One of the most notable
was Moses: “Thus the Lord used to speak to Moses face to face, as a man
speaks to his friend.” Exodus 33:11, RSV.
God welcomes just the kind of conversations about Him that we are
having in this book. In fact, He would welcome us to have the same kind
of conversation directly with Him! And in my imagination, I can see Him
seated in a chair across from us. We know that He is the Infinite One
whose words hung the whole vast universe in space. We know that He
is the One who is worshiped with awe by all the brilliant angels. Yet as
He sits there across from us, He values nothing higher than our freedom.
He invites our inquiries. He does not want us to be afraid. Surely such
a God deserves our deepest reverence, awe, wonder, and worship.
Surely, He deserves to be believed when He says, “There is no need to
be afraid.”
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: I love the way you put that, to imagine our heavenly Father sitting down and talking with us. It certainly is beautiful.
Graham Maxwell: If we believe that Jesus is God, He did exactly
that all those years He was on earth. And if we have seen Him, we have
seen the Father (John 14:9). Do we really believe the implications of that?
Or do we think that when we get to heaven, even Jesus will be different? No more quiet chats by the River of Life?
Lou: Why is it so hard for us to really grasp this and to experience
it?
Graham: Well, I can think of at least two reasons. One is our own
natural limitations. It seems almost unbelievable. The other reason is
that there is an adversary who is determined that we not recognize this.
He wants us to have a different picture of God. That’s been his whole
campaign, and he’s won so many believers that it doesn’t seem fair. His
evangelism, “bad news-ism,” has been so very successful.
Lou: I have a number of questions that relate to the previous chapter, but also tie in to this one. The first is concerned with wrath and punishment. “Do you think the concept of wrath and punishment has a useful purpose? Can it help us to remember the importance of remaining in
harmony with God’s truthfulness and trustworthiness?”
Graham: God has obviously used such language many, many times.
Wrath and punishment have been useful to Him. But it’s sad that He had
to settle for that. When Israel was noisy and irreverent, God had to
strike a little fear into their hearts. And in the midst of their terror was
a measure of reverence and respect. But when our reverence is based on
fear only, the moment the thunder dies away the reverence evaporates.
Jesus really demonstrated this in His lament over Jerusalem (Luke 19:41–
44; Matthew 23:37). There was no thunder, no lightning, and no earthquake. He simply wept quietly over the city. And many despised Him
for it. I do love it, though, that the children were never afraid of Him.
They would sit in His lap and according to one description they would
“reach up and kiss that pensive face.” Ellen G. White, Steps to Christ, 11.
Lou: Is it wrath and punishment that you are speaking about when
you talk about emergency measures? Or is it the picture of a teacher
standing on the desk throwing the chalk and the erasers to get our attention?
Graham: Both would be emergency measures; they are not God’s
regular way of doing things. There is a whole chapter on God’s emergency measures coming (Chapter Eleven).
Lou: This same questioner went on to ask, “Do you feel comfortable
so extensively re-reading passages like Revelation 14:10 in the third
angel’s message?”
Graham: It’s significant that the last great message from the angels
to this earth is about the destruction of the wicked. That’s very strong
language. It’s God’s last message of warning just before the End. Things
must be really desperate for Him to raise His voice that loud. It would be
like a father walking with his son up in the mountains, and the son is getting closer and closer to the cliff. At first the father says, “Son, stop right
where you are.” But he doesn’t hear. He raises his voice, but the wind is
blowing it away. So finally the father at the top of his lungs shouts to the
boy, “Stop where you are!!” A nearby group may say to themselves,
“Listen to that heartless father, bellowing at his poor little boy.” When
they get closer and learn the whole situation they say, “Forgive us; we
misunderstood.” I think many of us may owe God an apology. I’m glad
He’s raised His voice. We needed it.
Lou: So Revelation 14:10 is warning us how dangerous the cliff is.
Graham: This is the strongest language in all of Scripture. But I
like the fact that the one who wrote Revelation 14:10 is the same person
who wrote, “There is no fear in love. Perfect love casts out all fear” (1
John 4:18). So we can understand that God is love and still understand
the need for earthquake, wind and fire.
Lou: Someone has raised a question about hell. “Where did the idea
of hell come from? It seems to be so prevalent throughout Christianity.”
Graham: One of the first Christian documents that describes hell
is the (Ethiopic) Apocalypse of Peter which is in what some call the
Christian Apocrypha or the New Testament Apocrypha. This document
precedes Dante’s Inferno by many centuries. It’s a very detailed description of the fate of the wicked. If your prevailing sin was lying, you might
be hung by your tongue over a hot flame. If some other organ of the body
was your instrument in sin, you might be similarly tortured. It’s very
detailed (based on (Ethiopic) Apocalypse of Peter 20–33).
The real origin of the belief in hell, however, is Satan’s lie in the
Garden of Eden: “You will not surely die.” Genesis 3:4. You see, if
human beings are all immortal, but not all are going to be saved, then
some are going to be immortally lost. That would mean they have to go
somewhere else. Everyone either goes to heaven or to some other place,
such as a place of sulfurous flames. In that scenario God would have no
choice, since the soul is immortal anyway. I believe that a combination of
the immortality of the soul, and Satan’s caricature of a vengeful God, has
produced the doctrine of hell. And there is no teaching that has turned
more people against God than the doctrine of eternal torment in hell.
Lou: “Could the word ‘wrath’ have been translated differently in
the Bible? Could there have been a better word than ‘wrath’ used?”
Graham: That’s an interesting question. It brings up the limitations of human language. The Greek word for wrath is orge, which did
mean wrath, even fury. In revealing Himself to us, God is limited to our
human language with all the hazards that pertain to that. So we have to
study the Bible in its entire context to fully understand. But that raises
the question: “Why would God use the word ‘wrath’ at all, if He does
not wish to be understood as angry?” It would seem that He has been
willing to leave the impression that He is angry with us.
I would explain that in terms of a father’s conversation with his lit-
tle girl. He has tried everything under the sun to persuade her not to
help herself to cookies at three in the afternoon, and none of it has
worked. So he finally puts this little youngster in front of him. And she
is looking completely cute and innocent, even in the midst of iniquity.
And he says, “Look, if you do that one more time, Daddy’s going to be
very, very cross with you.” She’s too young to know what “cross”
means. She can’t look it up in the dictionary. But she knows what
“cross” means by the look on his face and the tone of his voice. It makes
the father feel like a bully. Here’s this little, tiny child with pigtails, and
he’s saying, “Daddy will be very, very cross with you.”
A little later, when he thinks he has impressed her adequately; he
finds her tiptoeing around the corner, reaching up, and taking another
cookie. And it’s so cute, he wishes he had his camera ready. But then he
realizes this is the time for some stern discipline. So he puts this helpless
little girl in front of him. She puts her hands behind her and assumes that
cute little posture that little girls can. And the big brute says, “Daddy
told you that if you did that one more time, he’d be very, very cross.”
For that to work you have to look cross and sound cross. You’ve got to
go through with this thing for her sake.
When it comes to the Bible, I think it’s a matter of communication.
God is dealing with children. The whole human race has acted like immature children. So He has to say, “Do that one more time and I will be furious with you! And how I wish I didn’t have to say that.” So our own
human experience helps us to understand the Scriptures. Parents and
teachers are in the best position to read the Bible sympathetically, it
seems to me.
Lou: You remind me of a friend of mine who asked his little girl as
he took off his belt, “You know what’s going to happen now?” And she
chuckled and said, “Your trousers are going to fall down.” He couldn’t
keep a straight face, so he had to leave the room for a bit because he was
trying to make the message stick.
Another question. “Why don’t Bible translators use ‘reverence’
instead of ‘fear’? It seems like that would help.”
Graham: Well, that would involve interpretation, and this enters
into the whole philosophy of translation. Should a version render the
original literally? None of them does all the time. Such a version would
be quite unreadable. So the question is, how much shall we interpret?
There’s always a certain amount of hesitation about that. When a man
like Dr. Taylor (author of The Living Bible) does a sincere job of paraphras-
ing, he gets into trouble for doing it. People feel he has interpreted too
much. There is always a tension between precisely representing the original and making it clear in the English. So the Revised Standard Version,
which is very conservative, simply reads “fear” and leaves it up to the
reader to determine from the context whether it’s terror or reverence.
That’s why I like using more than one version.
Lou: Jesus is love personified. In Luke 11:37–52 He was invited to
dine in the home of a Pharisee. He seemed comfortable in accepting the
invitation. No doubt it seemed like a good opportunity to show His love
for the Pharisees. But was it still love when He pronounced woes on the
Pharisees and the lawyers just before dinner?
Graham: I wish we had a video of the look on His face and the
sound of His voice. I am sure there were tears in His voice when He said
what He did, because He was addressing His own children. And it’s
very clear in Scripture that God does not want anyone to be lost. But
when people’s behavior was gross and unacceptable, He was honest
with them, like a good physician. You would like the doctor to tell you
the truth and to do whatever needs to be done. And so He gave them
the unvarnished truth for their own sakes. This is the One who gave His
life for them a little while later. So there’s a time for denunciation, but
it had better be done with tears in the voice.
Lou: What if Jesus suddenly appeared at your home? Would you be
afraid?
Graham: I’ve often wondered about that. I think the blood pressure would rise and the pulse would quicken, and I’d hope my vascular
system could handle it. But I would be saying to myself, “There is no
need to be afraid.” But to have such an awesome Person come in, you’d
be bound to react, wouldn’t you? I love the way that John “fell at His
feet as though dead” (Revelation 1:17). But Jesus immediately says to
him, “Get up, and don’t be scared.” Over and over in the Bible, when
Ezekiel and others have fallen at His feet, He says, “Get up, don’t be
scared” (Exodus 20:20; Judges 6:22–23; Ezekiel 2:1; Daniel 10:5–19; Luke
1:11–13, 26–30; 5:8–10). He doesn’t want us on the ground, and He
doesn’t want us to be scared.
Lou: Well now Graham, what if the Father, God the Father,
appeared at your home instead? Would you feel any different?
Graham: That would be a beautiful test case! If I should be more
afraid of the Father than the Son, then I’m not living up to what I’ve
been saying tonight. I guess I’d be saying to myself, “If you’ve seen Me,
you’ve seen the Father” and “God is just as loving as His Son.” I hope
when that day comes, I will fully behave the way I believe. There is no
need to be more afraid of the Father than of the Son.
I love to picture people arriving in the hereafter and meeting Jesus
first. And He says to them, “Would you like to meet the Father?”
“Well, if You go with us, we’d be willing to go.”
Then Jesus might say, “Are you still a little scared?”
“Well, we’re embarrassed to say so, but yes.”
“Then I’ll go with you.” And then they’ll go in with the Son to see
the Father, and find out the Father’s face is just as kind as that of the
Son.
 You see, some folk have died a friend of the Son but still a little
afraid of the Father. But they’re safe to save nevertheless. They’re willing to listen. I think there will be many happy surprises in the hereafter,
when people discover that the Father is just as gentle as the Son.
Lou: And at the heart of it is the good news of this chapter; “There
Is No Need to Be Afraid of God.” Now here’s a challenging question for
you. “You know of course, Dr. Maxwell, that you are labeled a proponent of the ‘Moral Influence Theory’ of the atonement.” I don’t know
whether they mean that as a compliment or as a criticism. “What is the
difference between the ‘Moral Influence Theory’ and ‘the larger view’?”
Would you explain the difference?
Graham: Well, a lot depends on what people mean by the “Moral
Influence Theory.” As I have asked people through the years what they
mean by that, I don’t often get the same answer twice, thus I’m not
entirely sure what the questioner is asking. But I can still say something
about it. The classic view of the Moral Influence Theory goes back to a
man by the name of Peter Abelard in the Eleventh Century. He taught
the point of view that Christ lived and died, not to make it possible for
God to forgive us, but to demonstrate His love and so to win us back.
The whole emphasis was on love. Now there are some who feel that this
great controversy view that we represent is also simply to emphasize
God’s love. But it’s actually so much more than that.
So I would suggest that to call this larger, great controversy view
the Moral Influence Theory is utterly erroneous and inadequate. Because
in the larger, great controversy view, we recognize the issues before the
universe, the questions about our God: Is it true that sin results in death?
Is it torture and execution at the hands of a gracious God? Is it true that
the obedience that springs from fear produces the character of a rebel?
Theologians like Peter Abelard never, ever dealt with those issues. The
great controversy view is far larger than any other. But there are those
who sometimes caricature, perhaps, our understanding of the plan of salvation as the Moral Influence Theory. These critics generally do not
acknowledge a great controversy over the character and government of
God. And more than that, they believe that what went wrong in the
universe is a legal problem. In their view, we’re in legal trouble with
God and He is legally bound to destroy us in His righteous justice.
Fortunately for us, in that view, Jesus died to make it legally possible for
God to forgive.
I believe instead that what went wrong in the universe was a breakdown of trust and trustworthiness. That meant trust and trustworthiness needed to be restored. Christ had to come to answer all these questions, not with words only, but with painful, costly demonstration. This
is a far larger view and should not rightfully be called the Moral
Influence Theory.
There is another aspect of this that is very significant. Is sin only a
legal problem, or does sin affect you morally? Do you not only need to
be forgiven, but also have a new heart and a right spirit? There is a moral
aspect in the great controversy view.
Lou: I am hearing you say that the “larger view” includes aspects
of the Moral Influence Theory, but that it takes in so much more.
Graham: It takes in so much more. That’s why I prefer to say “the
larger view.”
Lou: I have heard the expression, “The Demonstrative Theory,” or
“The demonstrative view of the atonement.” How do you feel about
that label?
Graham: Well, I’m worried about any single label. Things are too
readily and easily classified, so I’m always looking for synonyms. That’s
why we have used “the larger view” quite a little in this book. There’s
truth in the language of “demonstrative theory.” When a person has
been accused of being untrustworthy, denials will not take care of it.
Only by demonstration of trustworthiness can trust be restored. The
fact that demonstration implies evidence — I like that. But I’d rather not
simply call it “the demonstrative view” because some folk who use that
term also have a rather narrow understanding of the issues at stake in the
Great Controversy.
Lou: All right, another question. “You mentioned that Jesus’
death was the result of sin. Was His death not also the wages of sin? If
Jesus died the second death (the wages of sin), how could He be raised
from the second death, out from which there is no resurrection?”
Graham: In this one question are represented two understandings
of what went wrong in the universe. Are we in legal trouble, or are we
in real trouble? The word “results” suggests real trouble. That calls for
healing more than just an adjustment of our legal standing. But we could
use “wages” either way and “results” either way. So we need to keep
going back to our understanding of what went wrong in God’s universe.
Our understanding of what went wrong helps us understand what
it takes to set it right and keep it right.
 Now if Jesus had died the second death legally, and if the second
death meant you never rise again, He should still be in the tomb. Since
that didn’t happen, the angels of heaven must not have been looking at
His death as a legal payment. They were looking for answers, and when
they got them, they were satisfied.
Lou: This question ties right into that. “Did Jesus die the first death
or the second death for us?”
Graham: The first death is the death from which there is a resurrection. Thousands of people have been crucified. If Jesus had only been crucified, it would have been the first death. But He died the awful death of
being given up. God’s wrath was poured out on Him, God giving Him
up like He will give up rebels in the end. He was made to be sin though
He knew no sin (2 Corinthians 5:21). But everything that happened on
the cross was answering the questions. “Does sin result in death?” Yes.
“Is it torture at the hand of God?” No. “Who did torture Him?” Those
who served God from fear did it. And once these questions were
answered, why stay in the tomb? He did stay over Sabbath to add still
more significance to the seventh day, but He didn’t even wait for the sun
to rise on Sunday morning. He went right up to heaven to hear the universe tell Him that they understood. So the problem of the resurrection
really only comes when a person is locked into a legal model. “It couldn’t
be the second death because then He couldn’t have come back from the
dead.” But that is not a problem for the “great controversy” perspective.
Lou: All right, I think you’ve really clarified that. The same person
also wanted to ask, “How does God forgive sins, and what is involved in
receiving the remission of our sins?”
Graham: The word for “remission” really means forgiveness. It does
not mean suppressing a problem for a little while, like the medical term.
What’s involved in God forgiving? I believe God is forgiveness personi-
fied. Think of the prodigal son story. What had to be done for the father
to receive his son back — dirty, diseased and malnourished as he was?
When the boy came home he found his father had forgiven him long
before. In fact, it was only when he found out that his father had forgiven him that he really repented. With God it’s not, “If I repent, He’ll forgive me.” Rather, it’s when I find how forgiving He is, that leads me to
repentance.
Lou: Here’s a question related to the previous chapter: “Are you
suggesting that God has angels who go against the law and kill, such as
His angel of death? Does God have a ‘death squad’?”
Graham: It comes back to the meaning of the word, “Thou shalt
not kill.” The word translated “kill” in both the Hebrew and the Greek
is actually “murder.” “Thou shall not commit murder.” And that’s why
Jesus could say, “If you hate your brother, you’ve broken that commandment already. He who hates his brother is a murderer.” Matthew 5:21–
22, ESV. There is no commandment that simply says, “You should not
kill.” There is a commandment, “You shall not murder.” The same angels
that put many of God’s children to sleep will also raise them in the resurrection.
Lou: So they’re not “breaking God’s law.”
Graham: They’re not breaking the sixth commandment. And in
the end, when the wicked die, it’s not a violation of God’s commandment either.
Lou: Couldn’t God have forgiven us without Jesus having to die?
Graham: He could have forgiven us to be sure; in fact, He did. But
the questions were out there. And those questions were so potentially
destructive that, until the questions were answered, the seeds of distrust and sin and rebellion would remain in the universe. I believe that
even if Lucifer had repented and come back, Jesus would have needed to
answer the questions. Once the questions were asked, you could count
on God to answer them, no matter what it cost, and He did.
Lou: Someone wrote: “There’s a lot of meaning in why we should
keep the Sabbath, but it’s the specifying of the day that seems arbitrary.
Why should we keep the seventh day when most of the Christian world
keeps the first? Why couldn’t we keep the first day the same way we
keep the seventh? What difference does it make?”
Graham: That is the topic of the next chapter. When people misrepresent God as arbitrary, they often have the Sabbath commandment
in mind. So I bring it in as a test case. I believe the Sabbath is actually a
remedy for this misunderstanding. It is a reminder of the evidence that
God is not arbitrary.
