Chapter Nineteen
How Soon Will the Conflict Be Over?
In the last three chapters we have introduced the topic of when the conflict of earth’s history will be over and Christ will return. That time
comes when God’s children on this planet have fully responded (“yes”
or “no”) to His final pleading. The conflict will be over when His loyal
children on this planet have become so settled into the truth that they
are ready to resist Satan’s final efforts to deceive. The conflict will be
over when like grown-up believers, they not only know the truth well
enough to survive but, like Job, they know it well enough to speak well
and truly of their heavenly Father. This chapter explores the timing of
the end of human history and its relevance to how we view the character of God. Our question in this chapter is not so much when the conflict
will be over, but rather how soon it will be over.
• • • • •
If we trust Him enough to be ready for His coming, we
really don’t need to know the exact time. If we trust Him,
all will be well.
• • • • •
Many of us wonder if the conflict will end and Christ will return
in our own lifetime. The disciples wondered about this too, and they
asked Jesus: “Tell us, when will this be and how can we tell when
You’re coming back and the world will come to an end?” Matthew 24:3,
Beck. And Jesus replied that even the angels do not know. In fact, in His
human form, even He did not know: “But about that day and hour no
one knows, not even the angels in heaven, not even the Son; only the
Father.” Matthew 24:36, NEB.
More Important Than Knowing the Time
Jesus went on to indicate that there was something much more
important than knowing the exact time. It was far more important that
His followers trust Him enough to be willing to wait. Do you remember
Chapter Three, “All God Asks Is Trust”? If we trust Him enough to be
ready for His coming, we really don’t need to know the exact time. If
we trust Him, all will be well. Jesus indicated this in John 14:
Set your troubled hearts at rest. Trust in God always; trust also
in me. . . .I shall come again and receive you to myself, so that where I
am you may be also. John 14:1, 3, NEB.
Jesus did not tell His disciples when, but He did give them some
details by which they could tell the approximate time. As they sat
together one day on the Mount of Olives, Jesus spoke of many signs by
which the disciples could tell when the End was getting near. These are
very familiar passages to all who believe in the Second Coming. He spoke
of alarming disturbances in earth and sky. He spoke of growing distrust
between the nations. He spoke of the rise of false religious leaders. He
particularly warned of those who would arise and teach that His return
was to be in secret. “Don’t believe it,” Jesus said:
For the Son of Man will come like the lightning that flashes
across the whole sky from the east to the west. . . .and all the peoples of
earth will weep as they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory. The great trumpet will sound, and
he will send out his angels to the four corners of the earth, and they
will gather his chosen people from one end of the world to the other.
Matthew 24:27, 30–31, GNT.
Now that is hardly the description of an invisible event. Quite to the
contrary, John affirmed very clearly in the last book in the Bible that
“every eye will see him” come. Revelation 1:7, RSV.
Reacting to His Return
Now in the passage we read above from Matthew, Jesus speaks of
all the people on earth weeping as they see the Son of Man coming back.
But other passages tell us that not everyone will be weeping. Those who
have learned to trust Him will be very glad to see Him come. This was
clearly predicted way back in the days of Isaiah: “In that day they will
say, ‘Surely this is our God; we trusted in him, and he saved us. This is
the Lord, we trusted in him; let us rejoice and be glad in his salvation.’”
Isaiah 25:9, NIV.
While many will rejoice when Jesus returns, most of the world will
have turned against God (Revelation 13:8). And because they have not
learned to trust Jesus, they will flee from Him in terror, even though He
will come back in human form: “They called to the mountains and the
rocks, ‘Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne
and from the wrath of the Lamb!’” Revelation 6:16, NIV. How could
they possibly flee from gentle Jesus, meek and mild? While He does come
back in majesty and power, there is still no need to be afraid. But Satan
has so convinced his allies that God is arbitrary, vengeful, and severe,
they will actually flee from Him as He cries after them, “Why will you
die? How can I give you up? How can I let you go?” Ezekiel 18:31; Hosea
11:8. How thoroughly Satan will have convinced these people that his
lies about God are the truth!
• • • • •
Satan has so convinced his allies that God is arbitrary,
vengeful, and severe, that they will actually flee from Him
as He cries after them, “Why will you die? How can I
give you up? How can I let you go?”
• • • • •
What makes the difference between the reaction of the righteous
and the reaction of the rest? Peter and Judas looked at the same gentle
but majestic face of Jesus during His trial. One of them was moved to
repentance (Matthew 26:75; Mark 14:72; Luke 22:61–62). The other one
was moved to go out and take his own life (Matthew 26:47–50; 27:3–5;
Acts 1:15–20). Our Lord is not two-faced. The difference is in us! Those
who have learned to welcome the good news, the truth about our God,
have learned to trust and admire God’s wise and gracious ways. They
will be ready to see Him come, even to see Him in His glory, and not be
afraid. They will be awestruck, to be sure, but not scared of our God.
Those who have despised and rejected this good news, on the other
hand, will actually look at the One who died for them and, like Judas,
be driven by that sight to suicidal action (Revelation 6:15–17).
The Gospel and the End
Of all the things that must happen before the conflict is over, Jesus
especially emphasized one. He said that the gospel, the true picture of
God, must go to the whole world before the End will come (Matthew
24:14; Mark 13:10). We can trust God to wait until His children all over
this planet have had a chance to make an enlightened decision. In view
of the confusion and the deception to come, God would not ask anyone
to pass through that period without sufficient information upon which
to base an intelligent choice.
This is consistent with the way God has treated angels and men
ever since the Great Controversy began. He has always waited patiently
for His children to make up their own minds. Think of how many centuries He waited for Israel to respond to the information brought by the
prophetic messengers that He sent one after the other. It was not until
the children of Israel had resisted the truth so long they they were
beyond even the Creator’s power to restore, that He finally and reluctantly gave them up. But after the Israelites had been taken off to
Babylonian captivity, God inspired the writer of 2 Chronicles to explain
why He could no longer protect them, why He had to let them go:
The Lord, the God of their fathers, sent persistently to them by
his messengers, because he had compassion on his people. . . but they
kept mocking the messengers of God, despising his words, and scoffing
at his prophets, till the wrath of the Lord rose against his people, till
there was no remedy. 2 Chronicles 36:15–16, RSV.
It was not an arbitrary decision. They were misbehaving so grossly
(as we know from Kings and Chronicles), He simply could not do anything more for them. He had to let them go into the discipline of captivity. And that’s what the “wrath of God” means, God sadly giving Israel
up. Fortunately, it was not the final awful destruction at the end of the
world. But it was discipline. And though God seemed to have abandoned
them, we know that He went with them, didn’t He? He blessed Daniel,
Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, Esther, Mordecai, and Ezekiel while
they were in captivity. But by and large, God could not work through
His people as a nation at that time. He had to give them up into the discipline of captivity.
The Misunderstood Patience of God
Sometimes this patience of God has been misunderstood. Some
think we can go on sinning with impunity because God is simply too
kind and too patient to discipline us or to turn us over to destructive consequences. Paul warned that presuming on the kindness of God is a serious error: “Are you, perhaps, misinterpreting God’s generosity and
patient mercy towards you as weakness on his part? Don’t you realise
that God’s kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?” Romans 2:4,
Phillips.
God’s patience has even puzzled His trusting children. In the days
of Habakkuk, they cried out to God, “Why don’t You do something?
Why don’t You rescue us and help us in our predicament?” They were
in despair that God seemed to be doing nothing (all based on Habakkuk
1:1–4, 13). And so the prophet Habakkuk was sent to urge them not to
give up their faith, but to trust God to work out His plans in His own
good time (Habakkuk 2:1–4). The problem, according to Micah, is that
we often don’t understand God’s plan (Micah 4:12). Let us trust Him as
we seek to understand His plan, and let Him do it in His own time and
in His own way.
• • • • •
We can trust God to wait until His children all over this
planet have had a chance to make an enlightened decision.
In view of the confusion and the deception to come, God
would not ask anyone to pass through that period without
sufficient information upon which to base an intelligent
choice.
• • • • •
The prophet Habakkuk sums up his message by saying: “(What God
has planned) may seem slow in coming, but wait for it; it will certainly
take place.” Habakkuk 2:3, GNT. In fact, God’s first message to
Habakkuk was, “I am doing something, but you wouldn’t believe it if I
told you” (based on Habakkuk 1:5). Habakkuk said, “Try me, Lord. Tell
me” (based on Habakkuk 2:1). And the Lord did (Habakkuk 2:2–4).
Habakkuk then indicated that he was willing to wait. That’s the source
of that great verse, “The just, God’s friends, will live in faith, in trust”
(based on Habakkuk 2:4). That verse was not about forgiveness. It was
written about trusting God enough to be willing to wait. That great
verse that Paul quoted in Romans (1:16–17) is a most appropriate one for
those who wonder why the Lord still waits.
In these last days, God’s patience even gives His enemies an opportunity to misinterpret it as weakness. They scoff at God’s apparent
inability to bring the conflict to a successful conclusion. This issue is
addressed in the whole of 2 Peter 3. Peter warns that:
In the last days there will come men who scoff at religion and
live self-indulgent lives, and they will say: “Where now is the promise of his coming? Our fathers have been laid to their rest, but still
everything continues as it has always been since the world began.” 2
Peter 3:3–4, NEB.
Doesn’t that sound like the doctrine of uniformitarianism? Nothing has
ever changed and nothing ever will. But that is not the real reason for the
delay:
It is not that the Lord is slow in fulfilling his promise, as some
suppose, but that he is very patient with you, because it is not his will
for any to be lost, but for all to come to repentance. 2 Peter 3:9, NEB.
Then Peter refers to Paul’s earlier advice in Romans 2:4: “Bear in mind
that our Lord’s patience means salvation, just as our dear brother Paul
also wrote you.” 2 Peter 3:15, NIV. God’s patience is often misunderstood.
The Embarrassing Patience of God
God’s incredible graciousness has even been an embarrassment to
some of His people. Do you remember when the prophet Jonah was
asked by God to go and give a serious message of warning to Nineveh?
At first he ran away. Later, under considerable pressure, he went and
delivered his message. He was hardly a “missionary volunteer.” Think of
the pressure the Lord had to put on Jonah to get him to go to Nineveh
and deliver a very serious message to a very dangerous people. Jonah
walked the streets and said, “Yet forty days and Nineveh will be
destroyed” (based on Jonah 3:4).
Then he went out and sat down on a hillside nearby to watch the
city come to its end (Jonah 4:5). But it didn’t. The people of Nineveh
repented, and the city was not destroyed (Jonah 3:10). And Jonah complained angrily to God. He said:
Lord, didn’t I say before I left home that this is just what you
would do? That’s why I did my best to run away to Spain! I knew that
you are a loving and merciful God, always patient, always kind, and
always ready to change your mind and not punish. Now then, Lord,
let me die. I am better off dead than alive. Jonah 4:2–3, GNT.
Think how well this man knew God way back in Old Testament
times! Those are words Isaiah, Jeremiah, Moses, or Abraham would have
been proud to speak. In fact, none of them used better words than that
to talk about our God. But Jonah was ashamed. God’s kindness had
embarrassed him. He was so humiliated, his reputation as a reliable
prophet was so destroyed, that he was prepared to die!
God reasoned with frustrated Jonah. “Have you no pity for these
people? Aren’t you glad that they have chosen to repent?” Jonah 4:4, 11.
God even mentioned the cattle in the city at the end of the book (4:11).
“Don’t you care about them?” But Jonah was much more concerned
about his own reputation. Moses, Abraham, Jeremiah, and Paul all
announced themselves proud to know God as they did. They were
proud of Him and proud of the good news. Jonah also knew God, but he
was ashamed.
The Great Advent Movement
About a century and a half ago there arose, in various parts of the
world, the growing conviction that the coming of Christ was very near.
Bible students in many different churches began to see in certain remarkable events the fulfillment of some of the signs that Jesus had given to
His disciples in Matthew, signs like: “The sun will be darkened, and the
moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky. . . .” Matthew
24:29, NIV.
They saw the fulfillment of this verse in the darkening of the sun
and moon on May 19, 1780, and the remarkable falling of the stars on
November 13, 1833. They combined these observations with their study
of prophecies in Daniel and Revelation that pointed to important events
that would occur in 1798 and 1844. They saw in all these things an accumulation of evidence that the long-looked-for advent was very near.
Though some are now puzzled about these signs and dates, that was
when the great second-advent movement did begin. It was precipitated
when all those remarkable signs and prophetic periods seemed to come
together. It was not just one date, one event, or one piece of evidence.
It was all that evidence combined. That’s the way God has always
sought to convince us throughout the history of the conflict. Not just a
little here and a little there, but an accumulation of evidence.
Some of those eager “adventists” were led by their study of the
prophetic times and the heavenly evidences to begin giving special attention to the three angels’ messages in Revelation 14. They came to the
conclusion that the time had arrived for these three messages of warning
and invitation to be given to the whole world. They undertook a very
bold venture. The excitement and the disappointment of those days are
all part of religious history. There are millions of Christians in the world
today who still agree that those early adventists had indeed seen God’s
signal that the Second Coming was near. They didn’t read it correctly at
first. It was not a signal to pack for the trip up to Heaven. Rather, it was
a call from God to prepare the whole world for His coming. That’s why
we are still here, because we haven’t completed the task.
Time has continued much longer than the early adventists expected. The signs that so stirred them occurred hundreds of years ago. But
are we surprised or even ashamed that our God would be willing to wait
this long? Are we more concerned about our reputation or His? The
good news, the gospel, is not about us.
Sometimes I think we make that mistake. We act as if the good news
were about us, but it’s not. The good news is about our God. Now if our
failure to complete the task has contributed to the long delay, then we
deserve to be ashamed. But the longer God waits, the more gracious He
looks. His delay only confirms the good news. The delay should lead us
to speak with pride about our God and not to make the awful mistake
that Jonah made.
You see, God needs better witnesses than Jonah proved to be.
Reluctant teachers of the truth, moved only by fear or obligation, are
themselves a very sad denial of the good news. God is waiting for people
who, in the words of Peter: “Look eagerly for the coming of the Day of
God and work to hasten it on.” 2 Peter 3:12, NEB.
How Long Will God Have to Wait?
That leads us to the question, how much longer do you think God
will have to wait? Well, we can trust God to wait just as long as there is
hope for anyone. We can also trust God not to wait a moment longer than
makes sense. After all, who longs more than God to bring everything to
an end, recreate this world, and give it to His trusting saints? When,
then, will it end? Only God, the One who reads our every thought, will
know when all final decisions have been made. That’s why Jesus gave
this advice in Matthew: “So then, you also must always be ready, because
the Son of Man will come at an hour when you are not expecting him.”
Matthew 24:44, GNT.
• • • • •
God never asks us to believe without evidence. He does not
offer claims, but rather demonstration, and this takes time.
• • • • •
We are not entirely in the dark about this, however. Paul counsels
us in 1 Thessalonians: “But you, brothers, are not living in darkness, and
so the day will not like a thief take you by surprise.” 1 Thessalonians 5:4,
Kleist and Lilly. You see, like the angels, we do not know the exact day
or hour. But we do know what will take place before the End comes. We
can count on it. After all these years and after paying such a price, God
is not about to change His way of leading the family. Nor is He about to
fail. Consistent with the way God has always handled this conflict in the
family, He never asks us to believe without evidence. He does not offer
claims, but rather demonstration, and this takes time. We know that God
will not come until the world has been warned. And He will not come
until His children are ready. But when they are ready, He will waste no
time. He will come.
So how soon do you think the conflict will be over?
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: Our question in this chapter has been, “How Soon
Will the Conflict Be Over?” From what you have said, the close of the
conflict seems to be tied in very closely with the Second Coming of
Christ. But is that really the end of the conflict? Aren’t there some other
very important events, such as the Millennium and the destruction of
the wicked, that are part of what we might call “the conflict”?
Graham Maxwell: That’s true. There are major events that come
after the Second Coming. But there is a sense in which the Second
Coming really does mark the end of the conflict, because the key to the
conflict is not a physical war in which the powers of heaven are arrayed
against the powers of earth. Rather, the essential conflict is in the minds
of God’s children throughout the universe. And the Second Coming
means it’s all over in that sense. The loyal are committed forever to loyalty, and the disloyal are committed forever to their rebellious rejection
of God. The important conflict is the one that takes place in our minds.
We’ve talked about how the most essential aspect of the conflict is
for God to demonstrate the truth about Himself. Some will object,
“That doesn’t make us very important.” But if His demonstration does
not lead some of us to inner conviction, He’s failed. So we are not just
pawns. He is trying to win us. We are very much involved in this conflict. It is not just heavenly, this war is being fought in the minds of
God’s own children.
Lou: This takes us all the way back to the first chapter, the one
about the nature of the conflict. If it were a struggle about power or
armies, God could have settled such a conflict in one minute. Instead, it
is a struggle for decisions related to trust.
Graham: So we are not just spectators of the conflict. We are very
much involved, and we are coming to understand some of the most
important questions about Him.
Lou: Since we’re talking about the End, it reminds me of the first
letter of John: “Children, it is the last hour. We know that it is the last
hour” (based on 1 John 2:18). Was John wrong?
Graham: All the Bible writers who deal with the subject describe
the End as very near. I’m thinking of Joel and of Jesus Himself, who both
said the End was very near. One could also point to the statement in
Peter, “With the Lord a thousand years are as a day, and a day is as a
thousand years” (based on 2 Peter 3:8). Then John saw signs of antichrist
in the apostasy of some key people in the Church, and that led him to
believe that the End was near (1 John 2:18–19). And the impending death
of John (he was in his nineties) also suggested it could have been near
(John 21:20–23).
One night, perhaps soon after writing his letters, John fell asleep in
death. When he wakes up, from the most refreshing sleep ever, it will be
the Second Coming! Now, he might have some questions about the timing of the End at that point, but I doubt he will have any complaints.
And while he didn’t see the great closing events before the Second
Coming, he will get to witness everything from then on: the Millennium,
the Third Coming, the re-creation of the world (Revelation 20 and 21).
John won’t miss any of that. All he will really miss are the troubles of
the End-time (Daniel 12:1; Revelation 7:14). As we have discussed before,
the saints who fall asleep before the Lord comes will arise in time for
everything that really matters. They will even rise first (1 Thessalonians
4:16–17).
Lou: John talks about the Antichrist in his letters (1 John 2:18, 22;
4:3; 2 John 1:7). What is the Antichrist? What do we mean by that term?
Graham: “Anti” suggests opposition, and that opposition is
expressed in many ways. The most destructive way is not open opposition but subtle misrepresentation. If anyone misrepresents Christ, he is
an “anti-Christ.”
Lou: So it’s not just one person in all the history of the world.
Graham: There are many, many antichrists. Already in John’s day
many antichrists had appeared (1 John 2:18). The spirit of antichrist has
been working all these hundreds and thousands of years. I believe the
End has always been very, very near. If the conditions had been met,
everything would have ended much sooner.
Lou: As Jesus was talking to His disciples on the Mount of Olives,
He said He didn’t know the time, the day, nor the hour (Matthew 24:36)
of His Coming. That statement was true then. Is it still true? Does Jesus
not know now?
Graham: I would understand that He’s taken back all His kingly
power, and so He knows now. According to Philippians 2:6, when He
was here He truly “emptied Himself.” He lived as a human to show that
humans, by the power of God, can lead good lives. He used no power
that we cannot use. So I accept what He said then. He really didn’t
know at that time, but He does know now.
I’m impressed, though, that He says the Father knows. Some wonder how much the Father can know about the future. After all, if the
conflict is in our minds, if the conflict is over trust, then the conflict is
about moral choices. So Jesus would actually be saying, “The Father
knows when the world will have made up its mind and will have made
these moral choices.” This is my basis for believing that God can foreknow our moral choices. If He did not know them, how could He know
the day or the hour when the conflict will be over?
Lou: You talked about the signs in the sun, moon (1780 A.D.) and
stars (1833 A.D.), and these events seem rather long ago now. Didn’t
Jesus also talk about “this generation”? Matthew 24:34. Wouldn’t the
generation that saw some of these signs be the one that wouldn’t pass
away? If you’re right about the dates of these signs, was Jesus wrong
about “this generation”?
Graham: I think I know about twelve different explanations of
“this generation.” And they’re all an attempt to extend it longer and
longer. I remember when some thought it was good news to read in the
paper that somebody living in Outer Mongolia had made it to his 167th
birthday. And people said, “Oh good, that generation is still alive!” I
believe that generation is long since gone. I would have to put this with
similar expressions in the Bible. It means we could have completed the
work back in those days. God has always held out these kinds of possibilities to us. We could have done it, but we didn’t. I believe that the generation that saw those signs should have seen the End.
Lou: Is it possible that there are still more signs that we should be
looking for? For example, you didn’t mention Daniel 12:4, “Knowledge
shall be increased, and men and women shall run to and fro.”
Graham: Yes, the beauty of that one is that it can be constantly
updated as knowledge and travel continue to increase. It is very interesting to look at the pictures on the old Signs of the Times magazine that Dad
edited for so long. You see in the earlier covers men running to and fro in
antiquated Model-T automobiles and even before that in antiquated locomotives. But periodically they had to send the word out to the Art
Department, “Update this, because people are now running a little faster
to and fro, and knowledge keeps increasing.” And you can see the evolution of the airplane as well as the automobile. And then, of course, when
the first rocket went up and Sputnik was going around, the word had to
go out to the Art Department, “Update Daniel 12:4 again.” Anything
that can be updated for hundreds of years isn’t much use as a sign, even
if an increase of knowledge and transportation is supposed to tell us that
the End is near.
So I have to go back and read Daniel 12:4 again. The text is saying
that knowledge of the prophecies of the book of Daniel will increase as a
result of people urgently searching. The words used in Daniel are the
same as those used in Amos 8:11–12, “There will be a famine for the
Word. People will be running to and fro looking for it but they will not
find it.” So in the context of Daniel 12 in the Hebrew, I believe this
means that those prophecies in Daniel, which were sealed up until the
Time of the End, would then be studied afresh. And as a result of that
study, people would come to an understanding of the predictions in
Daniel, and a great second–advent movement would begin. And this is
exactly what happened. So I would date the fulfillment of Daniel 12:4
around 1798, when the prophecies of Daniel and Revelation were receiving new attention. This prophecy belongs at the same time as the heavenly signs we were talking about.
Lou: Talking about fulfilled prophecies reminds me of a question
one of our listeners wrote out very nicely for us. He says, “What answer
might I give my neighbor who believes that Israel will once again become
a great nation? There are many unfulfilled promises to Israel. He believes
that these promises have yet to be fulfilled, and he bases his beliefs on
Jeremiah 31:35–36; Isaiah 2:2–5; Romans 11, and Isaiah 31. And this
neighbor does not accept these promises in the Old Testament as conditional, ending when Christ died. He says, ‘God will keep His promises to
Abraham.’” Here’s someone who thinks that the things that are happen-
ing to the country of Israel must be tied in with the events we are talking about.
Graham: Well, what I like is his selection of verses. They are all
excellent verses. And if one were to lay those side by side, all of them
express some qualifications. For example, in Romans Paul says, “Not all
the physical descendants of Abraham are real Israelites; only the children of the promise” (Romans 9:6–8). And Isaiah says that though the
children be “as the sand of the sea for multitude, only a remnant will be
saved” (Isaiah 10:22), because only a remnant will respond. And
Jeremiah says, “Only those who have My law written in the heart will
be My loyal children” (Jeremiah 31:33).
Every one of those biblical writers suggests that many of
Abraham’s physical children will not be among God’s loyal people. Paul,
for example, says that only those whose hearts are circumcised will be
regarded as true Israelites (Romans 2:26–29). So I think if one were to
look carefully at the passages listed there, one would have the answer. I
would not look to what’s happening in Israel today as a fulfillment of
prophecy. God is looking at the state of Israel today as He looks at all the
other people in the world; if they trust Him, all will be well.
Lou: You mentioned that the coming of Christ, in one sense, has
been near for centuries. Do you think this delay of His coming has caught
God by surprise?
Graham: Your comment makes me remember the statement, “My
Lord delayeth His coming” (Matthew 24:48; Luke 12:45). It’s thought to
be a bad thing to say. But in the story, the Lord did delay His coming.
What was bad was not the delay itself, but that the servant in the story
began misbehaving as the Lord delayed His coming. The Lord has in
mercy delayed His coming. The Bible foresees this many, many times.
One of these is Jesus’ story of the ten girls waiting for a wedding
(Matthew 25:1–13). The bridegroom delayed, and they all slept, even the
saintly five. Another example is the text about the four winds being held
back (Revelation 7:1–3). They are held until an angel stands and says,
“There shall be no more delay” (Revelation 10:6). Second Peter 3 not
only predicts a delay, but explains the delay. The Bible very clearly prepares us for delay, but we must not misunderstand it. God hasn’t been
caught by surprise.
Lou: As I mentioned earlier, I have noticed that you sometimes
speak about “early adventist believers,” with a small “a.” I guess I’m so
used to seeing it with a large “A” I was wondering what you meant.
Graham: I deliberately use a little “a” because there are many
other “adventists” besides Seventh-day Adventists. We’ve been rather
possessive about that name. But there are many “adventists” in other
denominations, adventists in the sense that they are anticipating the
Advent. So “adventist” with a little “a” is not referring to a denomination.
• • • • •
The Bible very clearly prepares us for delay, God hasn’t
been caught by surprise.
• • • • •
Lou: You and I are both Adventists with a big “A.” That is, we
belong to a church that wants to emphasize the return of Christ by
including that truth in its name. You grew up, as I did, with our dads
talking about the End being near. I can remember as a small boy reading
that magazine your father edited so capably for many years, Signs of the
Times. And I just can’t help but ask you this question. With all of that
background, do you still believe that the End is near? Do you really think
Jesus is coming soon?
Graham: I asked my father that. I heard him preach the nearness of
the End for fifty-five years. When I was a small boy, I used to go around
England with my father, and I would sing and read the Scriptures. He
would preach on the nearness of the End. He always preached on the
nearness of the End. So just before he died, I asked him, “Do you still
believe it after all these years?” He said, “Had I seen and known all the
things we’ve seen and learned these last few years, I would have
preached it with much greater vigor.” So Dad was absolutely convinced.
But it is also true that God is waiting, as we could count on Him to do.
God’s waiting is even evidence of the good news; He is willing to wait
even though He’s so eager to terminate things.
Lou: I had the privilege of being your father’s pastor for a couple
of years up there in Mountain View, and I was always blessed by his vigorous conviction and confidence in the soon coming of Christ. And I
came to the conclusion that your father and my father were looking for
the return of Someone they loved deeply and trusted most profoundly.
Graham: Even my grandfather was the same. He died at ninety-five,
still confident in Jesus’ soon return. So I’ve grown up hearing about the
nearness of the End all my life.
Lou: They were not just looking for something to happen; they
were looking for Someone they wanted to come.
Graham: You can tell that the Uncle Arthur who wrote Bedtime
Stories obviously liked God.
Lou: That’s right. But let me ask you this. Did you expect things
would take as long as they have?
Graham: Well, we thought it was almost a lack of faith to suggest
things could take longer than five or ten years.
Lou: When you and I were young, it didn’t seem possible we’d
still be here. What leads you now to think of the End as near and the
Lord’s coming as something that may happen soon?
Graham: One way would be to go through the biblical description
of the events to occur and look for evidence of those. Another way
would be thinking of the larger, great controversy view. God is consistent with Himself, His government, and the way He handles things. He
is consistent in the way He treats His family, the way He treats the
opposition, and the way He wants to make things crystal clear. He will
end things in a certain way. So I’m looking for things to end that way.
For example, the gospel is going to all the world (Matthew 24:14). But
it’s hard to measure that in some ways.
Here is a more measurable evidence of His soon return. The good
news is based on the Bible. People have to be able to get hold of the
Scriptures. And never has the Bible been so readily available or so readable as it is now. A key condition of the End is the Bible getting out to
the world. The opportunity to know the truth about God is increasing.
Another evidence would be that God will not release the four
winds of calamity until His people are settled into the truth (Revelation
7:1–3). If I should see Him apparently releasing them, it would suggest
His friends are settling into the truth. Some of the things going on in the
world today make one wonder if the four angels are releasing their hold.
There’s another important indicator. People in the world need to
realize their freedom to ask questions, to make up their own minds. They
cannot accept dictated truth about God. They need to think for themselves. And I sense a great longing for freedom all over the world. Often
people don’t know how to handle it at first, but the desire for freedom
around the world is an important indication. There are also increasing
attempts to stifle freedom in certain parts of the world. Freedom is the
essence of this thing. People must recognize their right to weigh the evidence for themselves.
But maybe most of all, I would look for the counterfeit. Satan’s final
effort to deceive will be a brilliant counterfeit. I think seeing the counterfeit developing would be the most troubling thing.
Lou: In terms of counterfeits today, which do you see as the most
serious threat?
Graham: I don’t see the counterfeit as open opposition or a black
and white issue. The counterfeit is going to be something very, very
close to the truth. The Bible speaks of a counterfeit gospel going to all
the world, the Holy Spirit being poured out, and people seeing wondrous things (Revelation 13:13–14; 16:13–14). And I think, without
indicting anyone in particular, there is a vast counterfeit spiritual revival
sweeping the world. There are many innocent people caught up in it,
and they’re looking for the truth.
The emphasis in this counterfeit revival, however, is not on the
truth. It’s not on weighing the evidence in Scripture. It isn’t even about
God. It’s all about ourselves. It’s all about our feelings. And there is
great emphasis in this kind of religion on “getting in touch with your
feelings.” We think about ourselves too much as it is. There’s such an
emphasis on feeling in this kind of religion, feeling the power coming up
through you, from your feet on up to your head.
The gospel, to the contrary, is best apprehended the other way
around. It should come through the head first. The truth is apprehended
by the mind, a mind that is sanctified by the Spirit of Truth. There will
be great feeling in true faith, but to start out focused on feeling is very
hazardous. The good news is “get in touch with God,” not with your
feelings. A religion of feelings is winsome, there’s lots of love, and tears
are shed, with miracles of healing and apparent conversion. The deception will be very close to the truth. But as a friend of ours once said, “I
am afraid of anything that would have a tendency to turn the mind away
from the solid evidences of the truth as revealed in God’s Word. I am
afraid of it. I am afraid of it. We must bring our minds within the bounds
of reason, lest the enemy so come in as to set everything in a disorderly
way.” Ellen G. White, Selected Messages, vol. 2, 43.
Lou: Just to clarify, at the beginning of your previous comment you
said that the conflict wasn’t a matter of black and white. You weren’t
talking about a racial difference, were you?
Graham: No. I was talking about counterfeits coming in with
shades of understanding and deception. Satan will come as if he were
Christ, so the counterfeit will seem Christian.
Lou: What do you think is the greatest cause for the delay? Are we
contributing to this? You have spoken about God’s patience and how the
delay really makes God look good. Where might we fit into this?
Graham: We might be candidates for the Kingdom but are not giving the message that must be heard. I think the greatest cause of the delay
is that we are giving a beginning message all the time and not a finishing
message. We are giving a narrower view, a somewhat self-centered view.
We are leading people to be gratefully preoccupied with their own salvation. We are grateful for what God has done for us, yet we are preoccupied with ourselves at another level. The finishing message, the great
announcement to the world that will prepare the world for the deception, is about God. We’ve got to talk about the bigger picture, the issues
in the Great Controversy. We’ve got to help people understand the
whole picture in Scripture. That’s the finishing message. But meanwhile, we’re still using emergency measures to get people to be reverent
and to behave. As long as we have to depend on rules and regulations
and authority and pomp to keep people reverent, we’re keeping them in
a child-like condition. Until we can truly turn people free, we are not
giving a finishing message.
• • • • •
The counterfeit will not be open opposition or a black and
white issue, it is going to be something very, very close to
the truth.
• • • • •
Lou: What kind of circumstances will eventually move people to
embrace a bigger picture of God? Do you think it will take some fear-producing event, a world catastrophe, or something like that?
Graham: That is often suggested as a catalyst, but fear is more the
experience at the foot of Sinai. Fear gets one started. Fear is no way to
finish. How the Lord will bring this about, I don’t know. Insurance policies sometimes mention “acts of God.” But when the opportunity comes,
will we be ready to take advantage of it? When people want to hear the
truth about God, will we be ready to help them find it?
Lou: What’s the best way to prepare for this, to take advantage of
these opportunities?
Graham: I think it is understanding the importance of this larger,
great controversy view — the truth about our God. Since that is to be
found in all sixty-six books of the Bible, there is nothing more practical
and essential than learning to read the Bible as a whole. We need a
tremendous revival of studying the entire Bible, all of it, every story. We
need to take the Bible and read it through and through to get this larger
view and decide whether we like it or not. And if we’re proud of it, it
will show through in the way we speak. We will not talk so much about
ourselves, but about our God. Then when the opportunity comes, we
will be ready.
Lou: At a recent funeral service, you shared your conviction about
the nearness of Jesus’ return. He is coming soon. Won’t you review that
for us here? What do you mean when you say that? You used to preach
the same years ago, so, “How near is near?”
Graham: Actually, I used that title about forty years ago up at
Pacific Union College: “How Near is Near?” I think historically the great
event that is coming is just around the corner, because what needs to be
done could be done. And I think the increase of knowledge, which
Daniel 12:4 foretold, is occurring. Look at the technology now for communicating with the whole world, incredible technology.
It may be possible to communicate with the whole world and give
them this picture. On the other hand, the Second Coming is as near as
our last moment of breath. And that’s why I think of it at funerals.
When a loved one dies, the next moment of consciousness will put that
person face to face with the Lord at the Second Coming. And I love the
passage in Thessalonians which says that if someone dies before the Lord
comes, they will not have missed anything, they will arise first. Then we
who are alive and remain will be caught up together with them to meet
the Lord in the air (1 Thessalonians 4:15–17).
More important than knowing when the End is coming is to trust
God. If I should die tonight, I want to die His trusting child, because
then I will arise His trusting child. I’ll have no complaints, lots of questions, but no complaints. We might even say, “I kind of wanted to live
through the final events.” I think Paul did. He felt torn between staying
to help the Corinthians and his desire to be with the Lord (2 Corinthians
5:8–9). He didn’t believe in the immortality of the soul. He knew that as
a Roman citizen, when his head was cut off with that sharp sword, in
the next instant of consciousness he’d be face to face with the One he’d
been preaching about with such pride. He had no complaints.
One way or the other, the End is really very near. Especially in a
medical center, as many people face the end of their lives, we have good
news for them, “If you should fall asleep tonight; you will wake up the
next moment from a dreamless sleep face to face with the Lord.” That’s
how near it is for us personally. But I believe the big, global event is also
near.
Lou: We’re almost at the end of the book, the last chapter explores
the final outcome of the conflict.
