Chapter Eight
The Most Costly and Convincing Evidence
The way Jesus suffered and died is the greatest revelation of the truth
about God the universe will ever see or ever need. Correctly understood,
it means defeat for the accuser of our heavenly Father. No wonder Satan
has sought to obscure, even pervert, the meaning of the cross! So why
did Jesus have to die? Why was there no other way?
While there are many texts that could be included in examining this
topic, I have tried to limit myself to the ones that help to explain why
Jesus had to die. The cross is “the most costly and convincing evidence”
because the unique and awful way in which Jesus suffered and died
reveals something about God and His government that had to be clarified
before trust and peace could be restored in the universe.
Our God has been accused of being unworthy of the trust of His
created beings, of being arbitrary, vengeful, and severe. He has particularly been accused of lying to His children, of lying about death being
the result of sin. It does no good for God to simply deny such charges
or to claim that He is speaking the truth. It is only by the demonstration of trustworthiness over a long period of time and under a great
variety of difficult circumstances that trust can be re-established and
confirmed. And so the Bible records that God sent His Son to deal
with this breakdown of trust and trustworthiness in His family. In
other words, He sent His Son to deal with sin. Romans 8:3.
The Problem of Sin
In Chapter Two we considered the fact that sin, as the Bible
describes it, is much more than a mere breaking of the rules. Sin is a
breakdown of trust or trustworthiness. Sin means a stubborn and suspicious unwillingness to listen to our heavenly Father, with all the damaging consequences that result. Jesus came to set right everything that had
gone wrong, and to set it right in such a way that it would stay right for
the rest of eternity.
Let us consider again what has gone wrong, because understanding
what went wrong helps us understand the methods God has used to set
things right. It particularly helps us to understand why Jesus had to die.
As I’ve already mentioned, our God has been accused, specifically, of
being arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving and severe. God sent His
Son to reveal the truth about these matters. Why was it not enough for
Jesus simply to come and live among us the way He did? Why was it not
enough simply to tell us the truth about His Father and then demonstrate it by His gracious treatment of the worst of sinners? Couldn’t He
just show by His life that God, indeed, is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be?
• • • • •
Sin is a breakdown of trust or trustworthiness. Sin means a
stubborn and supicious unwillingness to listen to our heavenly Father, with all the damaging consequences that result.
• • • • •
The way Jesus lived and the way He treated people is, of course,
vital evidence. We will address that topic in detail in Chapter Thirteen,
“How God Treats His Erring Children.” But remember that the most
serious charge leveled against God is that He has lied to us. That He lied
when He said that sin results in death. Genesis 2:17. Worse than that,
Satan has turned God’s gracious warning to our first parents in the
Garden of Eden into a terrifying threat. He pictures God as saying to
Adam and Eve, “Either you obey Me, or I’ll kill you!” And think of the
baleful effect which this perversion of the truth about our God has had
on the human race. Think how it has poisoned people’s attitude toward
God and their practice of religion. How could this satanic view of God
win the wide acceptance that it has?
For thousands of years, parents have sacrificed even their own children to win the favor of their offended gods. Even in the Christian
world it is believed by many that if it were not for Christ’s appeasement
of His Father’s wrath (sometimes called propitiation), we would have
been destroyed long ago. Similarly, it is often believed that were it not
for Christ’s constant pleading with the Father, God could not find it in
His own heart to forgive and heal His children.
Who could have thought up such perversion? Does it fit the picture
of God in all sixty-six books? Does anything need to be done to persuade
God to love His children? The testimony of all sixty-six books is that
God has always loved even His most wayward child. That is summed up
in John 3:16: “God so loved the world. . . .” God loves not just His good
children, but all His children, both good and bad.
Those serious words to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden were
no threat. Those words were a gracious warning. Sin actually does result
in death. Sin so changes the sinner that the natural consequence of this
condition is death. Cut off by his own rebellious choice from the source
of life, the sinner will die. Out of harmony with God by his own rebellious rejection, the sinner is so changed that even the life-giving glory of
God becomes a consuming fire. How can this best be clarified? Not by
claims, but by evidence and demonstration.
• • • • •
Jesus came to set right everything that had gone wrong, and
to set it right in such a way that it would stay right for the
rest of eternity.
• • • • •
One way to answer this charge would have been for God to allow
Adam and Eve to die. And He could have said to the universe, “Who is
telling the truth? I said sinners would die! It is the Devil who has lied to
you.” Or going back even further, God could have left Satan and his followers to reap the natural results of their sin, and they would have perished. And surely then there would have been no question about the
truthfulness of God’s warning. Why didn’t God make those relatively
easy choices? He could have saved all the painful history since that time.
Keep in mind, however, that the beings in the universe had never
seen death before. So had they watched Satan and his followers die, there
was the hazard that they would assume God was executing His own children who did not please Him. Then there would be the danger that the
angels would serve God from fear, and the obedience that springs from
fear produces the character of a rebel. And rebelliousness is the essence
of sin. For this reason God did not take that relatively easy way. He did
not want the obedience and “love” that springs from fear. That kind of
obedience has dire consequences and is totally unacceptable to a God
who is as gracious as we know Him to be. Instead of taking what may
have seemed the easy way, God chose to send His Son in human form. He
died the death that is the natural result of sin. And the universe was able
to see how God would be involved in the death of the “wicked.”
The Book of Romans and Why Jesus Had to Die
Of all the sixty-six books in the Bible, it is Paul in Romans, perhaps,
who gives the clearest explanation as to why Jesus died. First of all he
recognizes the truth of God’s warning in the Garden of Eden. In Romans
6, Paul agrees with the record in Genesis: “Sin pays its servants: the
wage is death.” Romans 6:23, Phillips. Death is the natural consequence
of sin. But Satan denied this. We also recall Satan’s charge that God lied
about wanting what was best for Adam and Eve: “But the serpent said
to the woman, ‘You will not die. For God knows that when you eat of it
[The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil] your eyes will be opened,
and you will be like God. . . .’” Genesis 3:4–5, RSV. Notice the additional
charge that God is selfishly withholding something that would be for
their best good.
Now who is telling us the truth? God, or the great former light
bearer, Lucifer? How do you determine who is telling the truth? Did
God gather His family together and say, “I am telling the truth, the
Devil is lying!” That would only encourage the Devil to say, “No, I am
telling the truth. God is lying.” As we have emphasized, matters like this
cannot be settled by claims or denials. God’s way was to take His case
into court: “That you may be shown to be right in what you say, and
win your case when you go into court.” Romans 3:4, Goodspeed.
The Heavenly Council in Job
The Bible often speaks of such courts or councils of the heavenly
family. And if you wonder how many attend such meetings, look in the
book of Daniel where it says more than a hundred million beings are present as the court meets (Daniel 7:10). The heavenly council is also
described in the first two chapters of Job. There we have a powerful
example of how God resolves questions, particularly when the charges
of Satan are leveled against Him and His friends before the heavenly
court. In the council scene of Job, Satan accuses God of manipulating
Job’s faithfulness, and he accuses Job of being unworthy of God’s trust.
Did God say on that occasion, “That’s a lie, Satan, this man is perfect”?
No, instead He said, “You’ve raised a serious question. The only way to
answer it is to show you.”
We find that demonstration in the rest of the book of Job. Did Job
show himself to be a trustworthy friend of God? Did he trust God
because he was being richly rewarded or did he still trust God in the face
of seeming abandonment? The book ends with God saying, “Thank you,
Job, you’ve said of Me what is right” (based on Job 42:7). Job was God’s
friend all the way through, and God could then turn to the heavenly
court and say, “Do you need any more evidence about the falsity of
Satan’s charges and the trustworthiness of My friend Job?”
This is God’s way. God Himself has been accused. But He does not
merely deny the accusation. He says, “Let Me show you the falsity of
these accusations and the truth about Myself, and you decide.” Imagine
the humility of the Infinite One submitting His character and government to the scrutiny and investigation of mere creatures. But that’s
God’s way, and it is the only way to really establish love and trust while
maintaining the fullest sense of freedom.
Romans 3 and “Propitiation”
Paul tells us that when the fullness of time came (Galatians 4:4), God
showed His Son publicly dying as a means of reconciliation, as an answer
to questions, to be grasped by faith. The death of Christ was to demonstrate God’s own righteousness. For in His divine forbearance He had
seemingly overlooked men’s former sins. The death of Christ was to
show that God Himself is righteous and therefore can set right those who
have faith in His Son. What I have just said is based on Romans 3,
although I used some different English words:
Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God; To declare, I say, at this time
his righteousness: that he might be just and the justifier of him which
believeth in Jesus. Romans 3:25–26, KJV.
Now there is a difficult word in there, “propitiation.” Propitiation
in English generally means appeasement, and that is a most regrettable
translation. Propitiation is what you husbands may offer your wives
when you promised to be home on your anniversary at 6 P.M. to take your
wife out to dinner, and now it’s 11 P.M. and you’ve just remembered. So
on the way home you find an all-night florist shop and you buy some flowers and some chocolates and whatever else you can lay your hands on. As
you approach the front door with some trepidation, you open it and hand
the flowers and the chocolates in. You are trying to propitiate the righteous wrath of your deeply disappointed wife. That’s propitiation; that’s
appeasement.
In Romans 3:25–26, the word translated “propitiation” is hilastêrion. In the Old Testament, that is generally the Greek word used for the
“mercy seat” on the Ark of the Covenant. Actually, the Bible does not
mention the idea of “mercy seat;” Luther made that up. When Luther
looked at the Hebrew word used for the cover of the Ark, he found that
it means a “covering.” So he translated the covering “mercy seat” or in
the old German, “Gnadstuhl” (now written “Gnadenstuhl”).
• • • • •
Jesus died to answer the questions about His Father and to
prove that God was not the kind of person His enemies have
made Him out to be.
• • • • •
Luther first did this in 1524. Then in 1525 Luther’s friend Tyndale
brought that translation over into English and several versions followed
him. So that’s where “mercy seat” came from. The cover of the Ark was
never called the mercy seat until the early Sixteenth Century. But considering some of the options, it was not a bad choice. It’s just a pity that
our King James Version uses mercy seat in Exodus (Exodus 25:17–22;
26:34, etc.) and also in Hebrews 9:5, but does not use mercy seat in
Romans 3:25–26. Instead, it uses propitiation. I think mercy seat would
have been much closer to Paul’s intention. For the Greek word hilastêrion means literally “a place or means of reconciliation;” a place where
unity and at-one-ment take place. And so I ventured my own translation
of this passage:
For God showed Him publicly dying as a means of reconciliation
to be taken advantage of by faith. This was to demonstrate God’s own
righteousness, for in His divine forbearance He had apparently overlooked men’s former sins. It was to demonstrate His righteousness at
the present time, to show that He Himself is righteous and that He
sets right everyone who trusts in Jesus. Romans 3:25–26, Maxwell.
Jesus died to answer the questions about His Father and to prove
that God was not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to
be. So when Paul talks in the above text about God apparently overlooking men’s former sins, it means that people hadn’t died as God had
warned in the Garden of Eden. So one purpose of the cross is to show
that God had not lied about sin leading to death. He sent His Son to
answer those kinds of questions.
The Cross and the Wrath of God
So in imagination let’s go to the cross and watch Jesus die. First of
all, did He really die? The soldiers were surprised to find He was already
dead. Crucifixion was usually a very slow way of dying. Evidently something else had happened. Is it true that Jesus was dying the death of a sinner, to show us how the sinner really dies? That’s what we find in 2
Corinthians: “For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin.” 2
Corinthians 5:21, RSV. So Jesus died the death of a sinner. And what
caused Jesus to die? As you watch Him dying on the cross, is God killing
His Son? Is He torturing His Son to death? Is God pouring out His wrath
on His Son; something the Bible so often pictures God doing toward sinners for whom there is no further hope?
Well, it all depends on the meaning of wrath. What does the Bible
mean when it talks about God’s wrath? One of the clearest explanations
is in Romans 1. The entire chapter is worth reading, but let’s at least
look at the following four verses:
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and wickedness of men who by their wickedness suppress the
truth. . . . Therefore, God gave them up. . . . For this reason God gave
them up. . . . And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God
gave them up. . . . Romans 1:18, 24, 26, 28, RSV.
The “truth” Paul is talking about in Romans 1:18 is the truth about
God. Three times it states in Romans 1 that God’s wrath is simply His
turning away, in loving disappointment, from those who do not want
Him anyway. God’s wrath is leaving them to the inevitable and awful
consequences of their own rebellious choices. Is that what happened to
Jesus on the cross? Was Jesus given up? Paul goes on to say: “. . . Jesus our
Lord, who was put to death [“given up” — emphasis supplied] for our
trespasses.” Romans 4:24–25, RSV.
There is nothing in the Greek, actually, that says He was “put to
death.” The Greek word translated “put to death” is actually paredothê,
exactly the same word translated “gave them up” in Romans 1:24, 26,
and 28. Translators ought to leave them the same to show that Jesus died
under the wrath of His Father. But the real meaning of God’s wrath is
His turning away, leaving sinners to the inevitable and awful consequences of sin. And this concept was not new with Paul. It’s all through
the Old Testament, most dramatically in Hosea 11: “My people are bent
on turning away from me. . . . How, oh how, can I give you up, Ephraim!
How, oh how, can I hand you over, Israel!” Hosea 11:7–8, Phillips.
Did Jesus understand that this was the experience He was passing
through? Did Jesus know He was being given up as Hosea and Paul
describe it? What did Jesus cry just before He died? Did He say, “My
God, My God, why are You beating Me up? Why are You torturing Me?
Why are You killing Me?” No! “Why have You forsaken Me?”
(Matthew 27:46; Mark 15:34). In other words, “Why have You given Me
up?” Jesus knew.
Three Questions Regarding the Character of God
This part of Jesus’ journey began in Gethsemane. In order to fully
appreciate what happened in Gethsemane and on the cross, we need to
step back and view a larger picture. There are three fundamental questions that were raised by Satan’s rebellion and the great controversy
over the character and government of God. God could have answered
these questions with assertions and arbitrary shows of force. But God
values freedom so much, that the only way to answer these questions is
through demonstration over a long period of time and in a wide variety
of circumstances. At the heart of these “circumstances” is the cross.
The three questions about God’s character and the answers God
provided are summarized in the following:
(1) Can we trust God to tell the truth about sin and death? If
God does not tell the truth, then we can’t trust Him. So He did tell the
truth in the beginning, when He said, “This is a free universe, I value
nothing higher than your freedom. All I ask is trust and love. But if you
prefer to go some other way, it will lead to nothing less than death. It’s
that serious.” At that time an adversary asserted that God was lying and
drew a third of the brilliant angels to his side. Then in the garden (Eden)
God warned Adam and Eve that to eat of The Tree of the Knowledge
of Good and Evil would cause their death. But the same adversary told
Eve that God had lied (Genesis 3:4–5). These charges against God led to
a crisis in heaven and also on earth. Who should we believe?
In the Word of God and His dealings in history, God has provided
abundant evidence that what He says can be trusted. But is sin really the
cause of death, as God has claimed? In another garden (Gethsemane),
Jesus began to demonstrate with finality the truth that the wages of sin
is death (Romans 6:23). As the full reality of sin was placed on Jesus
(Romans 8:3; 2 Corinthians 5:21; 1 Peter 2:24), He fell to the ground
dying, a consequence of human sin. Already in Gethsemane, Jesus clearly demonstrated that sin leads to death, and that God was telling the
truth about sin and death.
(2) What is God’s role in the death of the sinner? Does justice
demand that God torture His children to death for refusing to love
Him? The experience of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane also demonstrated that God was not killing His Son. As we have said, in
Gethsemane Jesus began to feel His unity with His Father breaking up.
He began to feel the awesome loneliness of being given up (Romans 1:24,
26, 28). Had Jesus died in the Garden of Gethsemane, could anyone say
that the Father had killed the Son? To the contrary, God sent an angel to
sustain Him (Luke 22:43). As Jesus Himself had stated earlier, “No one
takes My life from Me. I lay it down of My own accord. I have the power
to lay it down and I have the power to take it up” (based on John 10:18).
The angels knew who Jesus was. They knew that He was God.
And if Jesus had died in the Garden of Gethsemane, it would not have
been because His Father had killed Him. Instead, the Father was crying,
“How can I give you up?” (Hosea 11:8), and both of Them suffered
together. And so two questions were answered in Gethsemane. Is death
the result of sin? Indeed it is. Is it because God kills His wayward children? No, He did not lay a hand on His Son.
Many, nevertheless, believe that justice requires God to torture His
children to death. No idea has turned more millions against God. This
belief has been refuted, however, not in words, but in actions. It was not
God killing His Son in Gethsemane, Jesus was laying His own life down
(John 10:18). The angels knew that it was God who was going through
this, and it gave them the answer they needed. Yes, death is the result of
sin, but it is not torture and execution at the hands of our gracious God.
There was a third question, however, that also needed to be
answered. Gethsemane by itself would not have been enough, the answer
to the third question required the cross.
(3) Why is it so important to understand that God does not
execute His sinful children? The simple answer: Because obedience
that springs from fear produces the character of a rebel.
At the cross Jesus again answered the first two questions. It was sin
that killed Him, not the Father. Why is it so important to answer those
questions? Because if God kills and tortures those who refuse to obey
Him, even His followers will not serve Him out of love and trust, they
will serve Him only out of fear. For example, if a man said to a woman,
“Love me or I’ll torture you to death,” she would either run for her life
or submit out of fear. Either way, the result would not be a relationship
of love and trust, it would be a relationship of force and fear. And what
follows from that is even worse. Obedience that springs from fear produces the heart of a rebel.
This was clearly demonstrated at the cross, where Jesus not only
died, but was also tortured and crucified. By whom? By the Father? Or
by allies of the most devout group of Sabbath-keeping, tithe-paying,
health-reforming, Bible-quoting “adventists” the world has ever known?
Before the religious leaders offered Him up to torture and death, they
even said He had a devil (John 8:48). They obeyed God out of fear
because they did not really know God:
Then the Jewish authorities asked Pilate to allow them to break
the legs of the men who had been crucified, and to take the bodies
down from the crosses. They requested this because it was Friday, and
they did not want the bodies to stay on the crosses on the Sabbath,
since the coming Sabbath was especially holy. John 19:31, GNT.
The religious leaders who crucified Jesus were serving God out of
fear. And the obedience that springs from fear produces the character of
a rebel. This is underscored by a statement of Ellen White: “A sullen
submission to the will of the Father will develop the character of a rebel.
The service is looked upon by such a one in the light of drudgery. It is
not rendered cheerfully and in the love of God.” Ellen G. White, That I
May Know Him, 120. Such a one would disobey if he or she dared.
Rebelliousness is only suppressed by fear, waiting to burst forth at any
time in bitterness or even violence against those portraying the true picture of God.
The Importance of Our Picture of God
The picture one has of God is so important. You see, the religious
leaders nailed their Savior to the cross and then rushed home to keep
that Sabbath especially holy. They rushed home to prove they were
God’s true people. That’s the awful result of serving God from fear
because you do not know the truth about God. With the death of Christ,
the three questions were fully answered. Does sin result in death?
Indeed, it does! But is it torture and execution at the hands of our gracious God? Indeed, it is not! What is so dangerous about misunderstanding this and serving God from fear? The service of fear produces the
character of a rebel. Fear turns people who are dedicated to obedience
into harsh rebels, and they unwittingly become God’s worst enemies
(John 16:2)!
• • • • •
Correctly understood, the message of the cross is final defeat
for the adversary. No wonder Satan has worked so hard to
obscure, misrepresent, and even pervert the meaning of the
cross.
• • • • •
Jesus did not die to win over His Father. Paul is clear about this:
“God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. . . .” 2 Corinthians
5:19, RSV. Nowhere does the Bible suggest that God had to be reconciled to us. Never once! Instead, God paid the price to reconcile us to
Himself! Jesus did not die to pay a mere legal penalty. He died to reveal
the truth about God and the falsity of Satan’s charges. And even the
angels had to learn this: “. . . and through him to reconcile to himself all
things, whether on earth or in heaven, [emphasis supplied] making
peace by the blood of his cross.” Colossians 1:20, RSV.
John 12:32 agrees with this: “When I am lifted up from the earth
I will draw everyone to me” (GNT). The “everyone” here is not limited to the human race, it is everyone in the whole family of the universe. These texts remind us to look at the cross in the larger setting
of the Great Controversy. The way in which Jesus suffered and died
is the greatest revelation of the truth about God and His government
that the universe will ever see or ever need. Correctly understood,
the message of the cross is final defeat for the adversary. No wonder
Satan has worked so hard to obscure, misrepresent, and even pervert
the meaning of the cross.
The Cross is Good News
The cross, nevertheless, is great good news to some of us. Yes, it is
true that sinners will die, but that doesn’t mean we need to be afraid of
God. In fact, Jesus died to prove there is no reason to be afraid. And
those who receive this powerful message will be won to repentance and
to trust. Paul was so proud of this good news:
For Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach the gospel,
and not with eloquent wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of
its power. For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing,
but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. 1 Corinthians
1:17–18, RSV.
The gospel is the powerful good news about the cross, which is the
clearest revelation of the truth about God and His government. Now
compare 1 Corinthians 1 with Romans 1, where you find that very
famous verse about righteousness by faith:
For I am not ashamed of the gospel: it is the power of God for
salvation to everyone who has faith. . . . For in it the righteousness of
God is revealed. Romans 1:16–17, RSV.
Paul explains here that the gospel (good news) is powerful for those
who trust in God, and that power is in the revelation of God’s righteousness. The good news is that God is not the unrighteous kind of person
His enemies have made Him out to be. Even in the Old Testament,
before the clarity of the cross, it’s wonderful to see that God had good
friends who trusted Him to always do the right thing. They were proud
to know Him and proud to speak about Him to others:
“Let him who boasts boast about this: that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercises kindness, justice and
righteousness on earth, for in these I delight,” declares the Lord.
Jeremiah 9:24, NIV.
Jeremiah was able to repeat those words with feeling long before
the cross. But now such confidence in God has been confirmed by the
way Jesus suffered and died. And among God’s friends, whether angels
or men, this meaning of the cross will have power to hold God’s great
family together in loyalty and in peace forever.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: If I hear you correctly, Graham, you’re saying that
Jesus died primarily to say something about God, to make the truth
about God clear to us. But what about the moving appeals that some of
us remember from childhood? That Jesus died for you? That Jesus died
for me? It was even in the songs we sang. Isn’t it a wonderful thought
that if I had been the only one who had responded, Jesus would still
have come and gone through it all just for me! How do you bring that
together?
Graham Maxwell: I still believe in that, and I think God would
want us to rejoice in that. I think it’s understandable that as beginners,
perhaps, we tend to be preoccupied with our own salvation and what
God has done for me, and you, and those we love. But as one learns to
read the Bible as a whole and get this larger view of the whole cosmic
conflict, one realizes that the all important thing is greater than what happens to me personally. It is the settling of these issues in the Great
Controversy. What counts is the establishing of the truth about God
that confirms the peace of the universe for all eternity.
Lou: Are you saying, then, that I need to “get over” this? Is it childish for me to feel so moved about Jesus dying for me?
Graham: Fortunately, what God says about Himself is what makes
it worthwhile being saved. Until God has established the fact that He is
not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be, there will
be no security. We’ll be saved, but in a universe full of conflict. So first
this must be settled. And, fortunately, that settlement includes you and
me as well. It’s not one or the other. The good news about what Jesus
has done for me comes in this larger setting. The way He has sought to
win you and me is also the way in which He has won the war. It’s the
same task, the same mission.
Lou: I think that’s helpful. But there are many words and terms
associated with the cross that I didn’t hear in your presentation this
evening. For instance, I was just reading a book on the substitutionary
atonement, the idea that Jesus died in my place. Another idea is that
Jesus died to satisfy the demands of the law, to “satisfy justice.” You
haven’t used that kind of language. And what about paying the price of
sin? And there’s this emphasis upon the blood, right in Scripture. What
about that kind of language, which is familiar to all of us. What do you
do with that?
Graham: The Bible is full of that kind of language. Let’s take the
word “blood” first. Sometimes we, with all reverence, act as if the blood
has some magical power. We sing, “There’s power in the blood.” We
even sing, “There’s power in the Word,” and almost treat the Bible as if
it had magical power. I remember Jesus’ words, “You search the
Scriptures because you think that in them you have eternal life” (John
5:39). But there’s no life in the Book as such. It is just ink on paper or
words on a screen. The Book has power because it witnesses to the truth
about the One who has the power. Only God saves. The Bible doesn’t
save.
I would very reverently want to say the same thing about the
blood. Blood simply represents the death of Christ. It represents His life
given in death. Apart from the meaning of His death, the blood has no
power. But the blood has great power in its meaning. When we come to
understand why Jesus had to die, that’s going to secure the universe
against apostasy and defection for eternity. In that context I can sing,
“There’s power in the blood.” But as I am singing, in my mind I’m saying, “It’s the meaning that counts.”
• • • • •
Blood simply represents the death of Christ. It represents His
life given in death. Apart from the meaning of His death,
the blood has no power. But the blood has great power in its
meaning.
• • • • •
Lou: All right. So you can still use the words.
Graham: Indeed. It’s very biblical to use the words.
Lou: So then “power in the blood” is a shorthand way of saying,
“There is power in the death of Christ. The meaning of His death has
the power to change my life.” It’s much more than just the image of
being washed in blood.
Graham: That’s right. I remember when I was baptized up at
Pacific Union College, the choir stood out there and sang, a capella,
“There is a fountain filled with blood,” and you could probably sing the
rest of it.
Lou: “Drawn from Emanuel’s veins.” I love that song.
Graham: That’s right. I like it. I’ve sung it many times myself. But
the older I get, the more I think of the meaning of it. In fact, sometimes
when we’re singing it, I have to stop and think about it. There’s no
power in just repeating the words. But there’s power in the meaning;
why Jesus had to die, how the cross is the most costly and convincing
evidence, and how the cross will provide security throughout eternity.
I’m definitely not going to make light of the blood. But it’s a symbol. We
have to ask what the meaning behind that is.
The same is true with “paying the price.” That can be interpreted
in various ways. Some have wondered if maybe God paid a price to the
Devil to buy us back, for example. But no, I just think it’s a way of saying, “This is what it cost to do away with sin. This is what it cost to handle the breakdown of trust and trustworthiness.” For example, Roger
Bannister was the first man to run a mile in under four minutes, but he
paid a heavy price to do that. He often fell to the ground unconscious as
he crossed a finish line. He left just enough energy to make it to the finish,
he had nothing left. But the price he paid to run a four-minute mile was
not paid to anybody else. That language is a metaphor of all the effort it
took to break the four-minute mile record. Similarly, Jesus did die to pay
the price of sin, but let’s not over-read the metaphor. As always, we
must allow the rest of Scripture to guide us as to the meaning we should
read into those words.
Lou: So some of the illustrations that we have used can give the
wrong impression.
Graham: All illustrations are hazardous, so the Bible way is to give
us many illustrations. One illustration can cover the shortcomings of
another.
Lou: But what about such metaphors as the “satisfying of justice”
and “the demands of the law”?
Graham: He died to satisfy the demands of the law. But that raises
the question, what does the law demand? Paul says, “Love is the fulfilling
of the law” (Romans 13:10). Jesus (Matthew 22:37–39) and Moses
(Deuteronomy 6:4–5; Leviticus 19:18) said the same. So the law would
seem to demand our love, but love can’t be demanded. If love has to be
commanded, it’s not real love. So what does the law say? Does it say,
“You have to love God and love each other, or you will be executed in
the most painful way known to our heavenly Father”?
Some of our good Christian friends live under the awful weight of
believing that God has said, “You either love and obey Me, or you will
be tortured in sulfurous flames for eternity.” That such good folk can still
love God is a real tribute to them, but it is not a tribute to God. Because
they truly love Jesus and are faithful, I believe they will be in the
Kingdom. But what an awful burden to live under! Yet I think Jesus will
love to introduce such people to the Father. He’ll say, “Would you like
to meet the Father?” And they’ll say, “Well, if You will go with us.”
And He’ll respond, “There’s no need, but I’ll go with you anyway.”
What a marvelous surprise it will be to millions of these people to meet
the Father in the Kingdom and discover that He is just as loving and gracious as the Son. We will cover this topic in the next chapter, “There Is
No Need to Be Afraid of God.”
Speaking about “the demands of law” belongs to a very legal conception of what has gone wrong in the universe, which we discussed in
Chapter Two. In that view, what has gone wrong is that we have “broken the rules,” and the law demands that God execute us for breaking
the rules. Or to put it another way, Jesus died so that somehow God
could justly forgive us even though we have broken the rules. I’m not
sure we have been able to make too much sense out of that. But it goes
along with the other one, “satisfying justice.” Whose justice? I have
friends who say, “If God does not give (Idi Amin, Saddam Hussein,
Osama bin Laden, etc.) several days in the fire, I will not regard Him as
a just God.” They have a strong feeling about the satisfaction of justice.
I think they really mean it, and I respect them for that. But I would also
love to relieve them of that burden. If I want to know why Jesus died,
I should go to the cross, see how the Father is involved, and then fit
what I see back into Scripture. I don’t see God simply fulfilling the
requirements of a legal model.
Lou: Could you say something about the idea of “substitutionary”?
Graham: It’s true that He died in our stead. He died as a substitution. After all, either He dies or we die. However, that’s where the comparison ends, because if God let you and me and all other sinners die, all
it would have proved is the truthfulness of His warning, “If you sin, you
will die.” And God could say to the universe, “Was I right? I said sinners
would die, and look, they’re dead.” But the universe would not have had
answers to questions two and three. When Jesus died, however, there
was no doubt in the minds of the universe that God was not killing His
Son. They were clear about that. And they also saw clearly the horrible
consequences of a punitive picture of God. The death of Christ answers
all three questions (see earlier section of this chapter entitled “Three
Questions Regarding the Character of God”). It’s more than just us or
Him. His death is infinitely more significant than ours. But had He not
died, we would have been left to reap the consequences and we all
would have died. So in that sense, yes, He died in our stead. But beyond
that there’s no comparison. His death is infinitely more significant than
the death of every sinful man or angel who has ever lived. The death of
angels and men would not have answered the questions.
Lou: What you’re saying, then, is that the “satisfaction” idea
doesn’t encompass everything that’s involved in the atonement, does
it?
Graham: Oh, I think it makes it much too small. I think it puts God
in a very bad light. And on top of that, it doesn’t answer the questions
of the Great Controversy. Many folk who prefer other understandings
of the plan of salvation do not realize there has been a universe-wide
great controversy over the character and government of God from the
beginning. As I mentioned in Chapter One, even Luther, hero of the
Christian world that he is, could not conceive of these larger issues
because he didn’t appreciate the book of Revelation. Not many, through
the years, have seen the sixty-sixth book picture of a universe-wide controversy over the character and government of God. And so they have
seen the death of Christ as primarily a plan just to save you and me, for
which we are very grateful. It’s just that the larger view of things makes
the cross much more significant.
Lou: I guess it comes back to this. What one understands the problem to be has everything to do with what the answer to that problem is.
Here’s an important question. “Are you suggesting that how Jesus died
is the way the wicked will die at the end of the thousand years, that God
will give them up as He gave up His Son?”
Graham: As far as the giving up is concerned, I believe that’s the
meaning of the third angel’s message. He will “pour out His wrath without mixture.” Revelation 14:10. This is the last time God’s wrath is
expressed and, as a result, all the wicked will die.
Lou: Is that God becoming furious then?
Graham: My understanding would be that if we should look up and
see Christ looking at the death of the wicked, He would be crying, “Why
will you die? How can I give you up? How can I let you go?” Hosea 11:8.
But we still would die.
Lou: Does that mean you share the view that God doesn’t kill anyone? Is that what you are saying, that God never has and never will?
Graham: Well, I honor anybody who wants to put God in a good
light, but I think some have gone too far, and that raises its own problems. It seems clear to me that many, many times in the Scriptures God
has put His children to sleep. Take the firstborn in Egypt. They didn’t
die because they were bad. They died because they were the firstborn
(Exodus 11:4–6; 12:29–30). Someone suggested that the Devil does God’s
killing for Him. But the Devil is not that cooperative, you can be sure.
No, the firstborn in Egypt died because the angel of the Lord put them
to sleep. And it’s possible some of them may arise in the resurrection of
the righteous. Who is to say they were all bad boys? In the Flood
(Genesis 6–7), with the 185,000 Assyrians (2 Kings 19:35), and on many
other occasions, I see God Himself putting His own children to sleep.
But as Jesus said, it’s only sleep. He resurrects them too. Those boys in
Egypt who went to bed that night, they are awake the next morning, as
far as they are aware, without any consciousness of the time between.
Lou: But now you are making a distinction that is biblical, that is,
a distinction between the first and second death. What about the death
of Jesus? Did He die the first or the second death?
• • • • •
The first death is the death we all die if we live long enough.
It is a death that is followed by a resurrection, whether
righteous or unrighteous. It is the consequence of living in a
world of sin. The second death is the one the Bible warns us
of, the death from which there is no resurrection.
• • • • •
Graham: The first death is the death we all die if we live long
enough. It is a death that is followed by a resurrection, whether righteous or unrighteous. It is the consequence of living in a world of sin.
Even relative saints like Isaiah and Elisha died. The second death is the
one the Bible warns us of, the death from which there is no resurrection.
 Which death did Jesus die? Had He died of crucifixion alone, He
would have died the first death. But He died to demonstrate that awful
second death. How come, then, did He rise on Sunday, if there is no resurrection after the second death? I don’t think Jesus came to show that
in the second death you die and stay dead forever. How could you
demonstrate that anyway? We would have to live forever to see it.
There’s no way you could really answer that. Rather, He came to
demonstrate how His Father is involved in that death. And even before
He was dead, He said, “It is finished” (John 19:30). Then on resurrection
Sunday He went up to heaven to see if the heavenly council agreed. And
He heard them say, “Yes, it’s finished. You’ve cleared up all our questions.” So I think He answered all the questions that needed to be
answered in the only way that they could be answered, and we don’t
need to ask more of the cross.
One more point. If Jesus died to pay the legal penalty, and the legal
penalty is the second death, you have a real problem. The crucial feature
of the second death is that you never rise again. So if the cross is all about
a legal system, if He died to pay the legal penalty, then He should still
be in the grave. In that case, since He went up to heaven on Easter
Sunday, none of us is paid up and we are in serious legal trouble.
Lou: So the resurrection is one of the most significant reasons why
the strictly legal model would not be adequate.
Graham: When He went to heaven, the angels didn’t say, “Wait a
minute. You are supposed to stay dead for eternity to pay the price for
sin. Hurry back to earth, we won’t tell anybody we saw You out of the
grave.” Instead they said, “It’s more than enough. You could have come
up on Friday!”
Lou: All right. Here’s another question: “If death is not the penalty
for sin, how can we understand the text that says, ‘Without the shedding
of blood there is no remission of sin’ (Hebrews 9:22)? Why then does
Jesus say to His Father, ‘My blood, My blood,’ when our name comes up
for review?”
Graham: In Hebrews, “Without the shedding of blood there is no
remission of sin,” is a reference to the Old Testament ceremonial system,
where blood was constantly shed and appropriately applied. But one has
to read on in Hebrews: “You see, the purpose was to be a constant
reminder of sin” (Hebrews 10:3). Hebrews is clear that all that blood did
not lead to forgiveness of sin (Hebrews 10:4), and it didn’t handle the
problem of distrust. The many sacrifices were all pointing forward to the
day when Christ would come to do it once and for all (Hebrews 10:10–
14). Without His death there would be no answer. What is the use of
being forgiven if you are going to live in a chaotic universe of continual
war and distrust?
Lou: What about the words of Jesus, “My blood, My blood”?
Graham: Jesus is saying, “Remember why I died. Remember the
meaning. Remember the answers that I gave. Remember how I made it
possible and safe to forgive and heal sinners and let them into the
Kingdom.”
Lou: But the implication here, if I heard you correctly, is that Jesus
isn’t trying to talk the Father into feeling differently.
Graham: We’ll take a look at that in the next chapter. We will note
Jesus saying, “There is no need for Me to plead with the Father, for the
Father Himself loves you” (John 16:25–27).
Lou: The Bible says things like “vengeance is Mine” (Romans 12:19).
It also speaks about the wrath of God and the destruction of the wicked
(Revelation 14:9–11). What do you say about those kinds of expressions
when speaking about our Lord?
Graham: Those questions will fit very well into the next chapter,
“There Is No Need to Be Afraid of God.” But let’s take up the idea of
“vengeance” briefly right here. In a couple of places the Bible says,
“Vengeance is Mine; I will repay” (Deuteronomy 32:35; Romans 12:19).
In Romans 12 Paul is saying, “Leave room for the wrath of God. Don’t
avenge yourself. Let Him do it” (Romans 12:19). God is saying to us,
“Look, let Me take vengeance on My children because I love them all.
But if I take vengeance on this enemy of yours, it might win him. Would
you mind?” And you might hesitate, “Wait a minute. I’m not going to
let You take vengeance if vengeance means You are going to win my
enemy over.” You see, the beauty of that is God saying, “Let Me discipline My own children. I might win some of them.” No wonder many of
us don’t really want God to do the avenging. When He does, there’s the
hazard that I might turn up in the Kingdom and meet my worst enemy
there, because God has won him through the discipline of “vengeance.”
Lou: That means God is using the word “vengeance” in a quite different way than we might be capable of doing on our own.
Graham: I see God saying, “Let Me give your enemy what I think
he needs.” And for us, that is hazardous. God might win your enemy and
you’ll end up neighbors in heaven.
Lou: Someone else writes: “It is wonderful to know that God is a
merciful, kind, loving, fair and just God. John 17:3 says, ‘This is life eternal, that they might know Thee, the Father, and Jesus Christ Whom
Thou has sent.’ Now here’s my question: How can a person really
know Him and be sure that he knows Him?”
Graham: That’s beautiful. First of all you have to know about
Him. If that doesn’t happen, how would you know Whom you are
knowing? Then you need to understand the biblical meaning of the
word “know,” as we have discussed before. It’s even used for the relationship between a husband and his wife. Adam knew Eve his wife, and
they didn’t just become acquainted; they had a baby (Genesis 4:1). In the
biblical sense, to know God is to love Him, to become friends. By way of
contrast, when God says, “Go away; I never knew you” (Matthew 7:21–
23), He means, “We never were friends.” So to claim that one knows
God means that one really loves and admires God for His wise and gracious ways. It means that one would really like to be regarded as God’s
friend, and also to speak and act like a friend of God. When you know
God, I think it will show. It will show in the friendly feelings we have
toward God. It will show in the jealousy we have for God’s reputation.
We will want Him to be seen as He really is.
Lou: Last question. “I have always been concerned about people
who wake up in the wrong resurrection and are truly surprised to find
themselves there. They had worked in God’s name or Jesus’ name and
had done many wonderful works (Matthew 7:21–23). If I were to die
tonight, how would I know which resurrection I would come up in?”
Graham: It seems to me that the people described in Matthew 7
were involved in legalism. They were serving God for the wrong reason.
From our perspective today, these would be individuals who are surprised to find they are lost because they think of all the tithe they have
paid, and all the Sabbaths they have endured when they could have gone
to the ball game. But they have never been God’s friends. So He says,
“Go away; I never knew you.” Friendship is the very essence of the relationship God desires to have with His children.
One more thing. Friends are not afraid of each other, so the next
chapter is entitled, “There Is No Need to Be Afraid of God.”
• • • • •
The Three Questions and Answers Simplified
1. Does sin result in (eternal) death?
Gethsemane and the cross prove that it does.
2. Is that death torture and execution at the hands of our gracious
God?
Gethsemane and the cross prove that it is not!
3. What is so dangerous about misunderstanding that death and
serving God out of fear?
The behavior of the religious leaders at the cross demonstrates that service based on fear produces the character of a rebel.
• • • • •
