Chapter Four
God’s Way of Restoring Trust
In the previous chapter we concluded that in order to have peace once
again in His universe, all God asks of us is trust. And there will be peace
again, just as there was before the war that began in heaven (Revelation
12). There will be peace once again because all the members of God’s
vast family will trust in their heavenly Father and He in turn will be
able to safely trust in them. Along with that, the members of God’s family will learn to trust each other. Wherever there is mutual trust and
trustworthiness, there is perfect peace, perfect freedom, and perfect
security.
• • • • •
Wherever there is mutual trust and trustworthiness, there is
perfect peace, perfect freedom, and perfect security.
• • • • •
Our heavenly Father, however, has been accused of being unworthy of the faith and trust of His children. He has even been accused of
being a liar; of being arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and
severe. It might seem incredible that the Infinite One would permit such
accusations. But in His far-sighted plan, God has allowed these accusations and charges to spread throughout the universe, including our planet. These accusations have led to the point of war, open rebellion, and
revolt. In light of this rebellion the question arises, How could God ever
restore trust in His universe — in His family?
The Methods God Did NOT Use
Some might imagine God visiting one of our churches, inviting our
questions in the Great Controversy. Suppose one of us took courage
from the story of how Abraham challenged God (Genesis 18:25) and yet
was welcomed as a friend (Isaiah 41:8; James 2:23). So we begin the
inquiry with the following question: “God, did You lie to us when You
said that sin results in death?” How do you think God would reply?
“Absolutely not! You will die precisely as I said. Any more questions?”
“Well God, like Abraham, I don’t want to sound irreverent, but
are You the least bit arbitrary?”
“No!”
“Exacting?”
“Certainly not!”
“Vengeful?”
“No!”
“Unforgiving?”
“No!”
“Severe?”
“Certainly not! How dare you ask such questions?”
And at that moment the floor would begin to move beneath our
feet, and there would be lightning and thunder and fire, and a great
cloud. And God would say, “Any more questions?” If such a scene were
to happen would you be satisfied? Would you feel convinced? Can truth
be established by the show of power? Satan tries to do that. He has to,
because what he says about God isn’t true. In the absence of evidence he
has to use other methods. He loves to bring fire down from heaven, as the
Bible says (Revelation 13:13-14), or do counterfeit miracles (2
Thessalonians 2:9), to seduce, intimidate, mislead or deceive us.
But since the truth is with our heavenly Father, He never has to
stoop to such methods. That is one reason, I believe, that God does not
normally reveal Himself to us. Because if He were to show Himself visibly our tendency would be to say, “God, if You’ve said it, we believe it,
and that is all there is to it!” Jesus even told His disciples in the Upper
Room, “It’s better for you that I go away” (John 16:7). There was the
danger that once the disciples recognized that He was God, they would
stop thinking things through. They would simply run to Him and accept
His answers to their questions on the authority of who He was. It would
seem like the right thing to do.
Yet in the Great Controversy God does not ask for that. So even
gentle Jesus said: “It is better that I go away, and I’ll send the Holy
Spirit, who will come as a still small voice. He’ll come to be a Teacher
and a Guide to lead you into the truth. You won’t see Him. He won’t
intimidate you. He only works with evidence. Most importantly, He’ll
help you understand the Bible” (based on John 16:7–13 and 14:26). God
does speak to us. He does answer our questions. But He does it through
what we call His Word. We talk to God in prayer, and He talks to us as
we study the Scriptures. That’s why I believe that really thoughtful
study of the Scriptures is a form of prayer. That’s conversing with God
as with a friend.
Now some people pray a great deal, but never hear God speak back
because they never spend much time reading the Bible. But if one reads
the Bible and then responds to God, there is conversation as one thinks
along and says to God, “That’s marvelous, what I’ve just read.” This is
conversation with God as with a friend, and that’s the meaning of
prayer.
But now, when we pick up the Bible and have this kind of conversation with Him, what do we find there? With respect to the questions
in the Great Controversy, do we find denials? Do we find claims? No, we
find evidence.
Even when a person has been falsely accused, there’s no way to
establish the truth simply by denying the charges. If just denying the
charges would have worked, think what God could have done back in
eternity. He could have assembled all of the angels, all hundreds of millions of them, and He could have stood before them in all His authority.
And He could have said, “I understand that I have been accused of the
following. I want you to know it’s absolutely false. I can be trusted. I
am not arbitrary. I have not lied to you. And I expect you to believe it.
Remember who I am, and don’t forget My power!” And all the angels
would bow their heads and say, “We agree.”
But in a setting like that, how do you know if people really do
agree? So God did not try this. Even when a person has been falsely and
unfairly accused of being untrustworthy, it is only by the demonstration
of trustworthiness over a long period of time and under a great
variety of circumstances, particularly difficult ones, that trustworthiness can be re-established and confirmed. And I understand that the
sixty-six books of the Bible are precisely the record of just such a demonstration, and every one of those books is an important part.
It’s Not About Power and Force
What methods did God use to answer the charges and accusations
in heaven? As far as the heavenly angels are concerned, the war has been
over for two thousand years. What did they learn that became a sufficient basis for trust in the heavenly Father? For the answers to these
questions we go to the Bible and we ask, “God, why didn’t You take
charge more vigorously and end the conflict? We would expect that of
trustworthy leadership.” And I hear the answer coming back as I go
through the sixty-six books of the Bible. If the Great Controversy were
over power, God could have settled it in a moment. But the great conflict
is not over who has the most power. If that were true, the Devil would
have been converted long ago. He knows that God has power superior to
his own: “Do you believe that there is only one God? Good! The demons
also believe — and tremble with fear.” James 2:19, GNT. You see, they
believe in God’s existence. They believe there’s only one God. They
have great faith in His power, in fact it scares them, but that doesn’t
move their hearts toward God.
A similar point is made in Revelation 12: “The Devil has come
down to you and he is filled with rage, because he knows that he has only
a little time left.” Revelation 12:12, GNT. In other words, the Devil is
so convinced of his helplessness in the face of God’s power that it makes
him angry. The Devil is an Adventist, you know. He knows God is coming soon, and it terrifies him to think of it. So there’s a kind of faith that
God is not looking for. It is the kind of faith that a show of power might
actually produce. It is not enough.
For a dramatic illustration of how power can be misunderstood, look
at the stories in Genesis 9 and 11: “God said to Noah and his sons. . . . ‘I
promise that never again will all living beings be destroyed by a flood.’”
Genesis 9:11, GNT. What a demonstration of God’s power the Flood
was! Did it win people? Was everyone so convinced by that display of
power that no one ever distrusted Him again? God continued saying to
Noah, “As a sign of this everlasting covenant which I am making with
you and with all living beings, I am putting my bow in the clouds.”
Genesis 9:12–13, GNT. This was a gracious promise on the part of God,
but the promise alone, in the context of the Flood, didn’t build trust in
the descendants of Noah.
Let’s go now to Genesis 11. “At first, the people of the whole world
had only one language. . . . And they said to one another . . . ‘Now let’s
build a city with a tower that reaches the sky.’” Genesis 11:1, 3–4, GNT.
Did the inhabitants of Babel believe in God? Did they believe He had the
power to drown the whole world in a flood? Did they believe His promise that He would never do it again? Their actions provide the answer.
They didn’t build the tower because of disbelief in God, but because
they did believe in God and it scared them that He has so much power.
But instead of leading them to worship God, His use of power in the
Flood resulted in even more rebellion on their part. So there is no need
to promote God’s power unless someone doesn’t believe He has it. The
Great Controversy is not over power, but over who is telling the
truth. God has been accused of the abuse of power and of a failure to tell
the truth. Such charges cannot be met by force. To resort to force would
only worsen the matter, as if to suggest, “I don’t have evidence, so now
I must intimidate you with power.” And so, even at the risk of appearing
weak, God chose the long, painful, and costly way of teaching, explanation, and demonstration.
• • • • •
The way Jesus treated people, the things He taught about
His Father, and the unique and awful way that He died;
these were the clearest demonstration of the truth about God
and His government that the universe will ever see or ever
need.
• • • • •
Finally He sent His Son. The way Jesus treated people, the
things He taught about His Father, and the unique and awful
way that He died; these were the clearest demonstration of the truth
about God and His government that the universe will ever see or
ever need. Sadly though, religion often fails to use God’s methods. Thus
it is often religion that most seriously misrepresents our God. Religion
through the centuries has resorted to claims and pronouncements, force,
persecution, and a great deal of pomp and power — methods God does
not use.
The Importance of Evidence
Even within Christianity, many suggest that God expects us to
trust Him without evidence. They then call that faith, for, to them,
“faith is believing without evidence.” Such blind faith is even called a
notable virtue. Then religion goes on to suggest that the use of such
methods (that is, to expect our faith and trust without evidence, just
based on His claims and authority) is God’s perfect, sovereign right!
And it should not be regarded as arbitrary, for He can do whatever He
wants to do. And that’s the method He chooses. He expects us to trust
Him without evidence and call that faith.
No! I believe with all my heart that God is infinitely powerful. He
is the Sovereign. And He can run His universe any way He wishes —
and He will, as Romans 9 makes very plain. But as we open up the sixtysix books of the Bible and ask God, “How do You run Your universe? Do
You ask Your children to believe You without evidence?” I find precisely
the opposite. I find Him warning us against believing mere claims.
• • • • •
The Great Controversy is not over power, but over who is
telling the truth.
• • • • •
Let’s look at some examples of these warnings:
If a prophet arises among you, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives
you a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder which he tells you
comes to pass, and if he says, “Let us go after other gods” which you
have not known, “and let us serve them,” you shall not listen to the
word of that prophet or to that dreamer of dreams. Deuteronomy
13:1–3, RSV.
Then look at the extraordinary story told in 1 Kings 13. It’s about
a young prophet, called the “man of God,” who was told by God to
deliver a message to the king. After delivering the message, he was not
to accept hospitality, and he was to go home by a different route than
the one he came. But as the man of God was heading home, an older
prophet heard of what had happened between him and the king. And he
asked his sons to saddle his donkey, got on it, and chased after the man
of God. When he caught up with the younger man, notice what happened next:
Then (the old prophet) said to him, “Come home with me and eat
bread.” And (the man of God) said, “I may not return with you, or go
in with you; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with you in this
place; for it was said to me by the word of the Lord, ‘You shall neither
eat bread nor drink water there, nor return by the way that you
came.’” And he said to him, “I also am a prophet as you are, and an
angel spoke to me by the word of the Lord, saying, ‘Bring him back
with you into your house that he may eat bread and drink water.’” But
he lied to him. 1 Kings 13:15–18, RSV.
The younger prophet believed the older prophet, and he went home
and ate with him. And as he proceeded on his way he was met by a lion
that slew him. The story warns us that people who make claims that God
has spoken through them may be lying to us. And it’s God Himself who
warns us of that.
You see, God seeks to convince us, not by authority or power, but
on the basis of truth and evidence. The most impressive illustration of
that was provided by Jesus Himself on the road to Emmaus. Two disciples were walking along that road, having a conversation about God:
While they were talking and discussing together, Jesus himself
drew near and went with them. But their eyes were kept from recognizing him. And he said to them, “What is this conversation which
you are holding?” And they stood still, looking sad. . . . And beginning
with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the
scriptures the things concerning himself. . . . Later, when he was at
table with them, he took the bread and blessed, and broke it, and gave
it to them. And their eyes were opened and they recognized him. Luke
24:15–17, 27, 30–31, RSV.
Why did He not reveal who He was at the beginning? Then He
could say, “What are your questions? You know that I will give you
authoritative answers, and I will expect you to believe them.” Instead,
He did not reveal who He was until He had led them to an intelligent
confidence based on the unquestionable evidence of Scripture. It was
only then that He revealed who He was. If the Infinite One works like
that, how dare we presume to take any shortcuts?
But hasn’t God often used a show of power? Among many other
occasions, we could list the Flood, the thunder on Mount Sinai, the fire
from heaven on Mount Carmel, and the plagues of Egypt. Each time He
shows His power, we need to inquire very closely — “Why?” In Egypt,
we understand why He showed His power. The ten plagues of Egypt
were needed to demonstrate the impotence of those Egyptian gods. In
those days, you judged the effectiveness of particular gods by the earthly
condition of their worshipers. The Egyptians were in charge at that time
and the Israelites were slaves. So obviously, to the ancient mind, the god
of the Egyptians was more powerful than the God of the Israelites. Even
the Israelites had come to believe it. But each of the plagues demonstrated the impotence of yet another Egyptian deity. For example, how can
you revere a frog when you have been stamping on them all day and
sweeping them up into stinking piles? One by one, through these
plagues, the Egyptians got the message. They began to think that the
God of the Israelites must be more powerful than their own. Some of the
Egyptians even went out with the Israelites. And the Israelites began to
think, “Maybe our God is not so weak after all.”
Now that is a very elementary perspective on God. But if you need
reassurance of His power He will provide it. In fact, that’s the easiest
thing for Him to do, to show His power. And as we have seen, even the
Devil admits that He has it (James 2:19). Peter also deals with this issue
in one of his letters. In 2 Peter 3 he tells his readers about people who
think that the Second Coming is delayed because God doesn’t have the
power to do what He has promised. To counter that view, Peter reminds
them that God created the world in the beginning and that He drowned
it in a flood. No one should draw the conclusion that God is waiting
because He is weak (2 Peter 3:3–10).
It’s too bad that God ever has to reassure us of His power. But if
we need such reassurance, He will do it. But while it is easy for Him to
do, it is also highly dangerous! God has been accused of abusing His superior power. So every time that God uses His power, there is the hazard
that we will misunderstand.
The Biblical Record Builds Trust
Does God, then, expect us to trust Him as a powerful stranger?
Someone whose power we fear, lest He abuse it? Is that the relationship
that He wants? Paul, who wrote so much about faith, especially in
Romans, is very clear that God does not expect us to trust Him as a powerful stranger:
For the Scriptures tell us that no one who believes in Christ will
ever be disappointed. . . . Anyone who calls upon the name of the Lord
will be saved. But how shall they ask him to save them unless they
believe in him? And how can they believe in him if they have never
heard about him? And how can they hear about him unless someone
tells them? So how welcome are those who come preaching God’s Good
News!. . . Faith comes from listening to this Good News — the Good
News about Christ. Romans 10:11, 13–15, 17, The Living Bible.
They didn’t have personal copies of the Bible in those days, so for them
it was all about listening, whereas today we might say reading about or
learning this good news.
Now where do we find this good news if not in the biblical record?
But how does one read the Bible in order to learn the truth about God
— to discover whether or not He is worthy of our trust? One way is to
go through the Bible and collect statements, sometimes known as key
texts, which can be very helpful. But key texts, or statements, are claims
about God. And God does not ask us to believe mere claims. God is love.
God is this. God is that. Those are claims. But where is the evidence?
The evidence is in between the key texts. The evidence is in the stories.
And we adults do a very strange thing. We collect the claims, but give
the evidence to the children. We hope they will understand how
Samson, filled with the Holy Spirit, could kill a thousand men with the
jawbone of an ass (Judges 15:14–16)! We ourselves may not know what
that means, but we hope the little dears will be able to understand it
clearly.
Children are willing to accept statements and claims. “My daddy
says it, and I believe it.” But as adults we usually demand evidence. As
the children grow up they too become more demanding of evidence.
Why do we give the evidence to the children while we ourselves collect
the claims? Let’s give the claims to the children, and take the stories
back. It’s time that we adults read the stories that the children know so
well. The stories are the demonstration of the truth about our God. The
key texts, on the other hand, are like summaries of what the stories
mean. They really are more like claims. So to know God better, to
determine whether He is worthy of our trust, adults have to read
all sixty-six books and ask of every story, teaching, and event, what
does this tell me about my God?
As I mentioned earlier, I have had the privilege of leading people
through the sixty-six books more than one hundred times. It takes about
a year each time. One book a week. And on the authority of the sixtysix books, I am prepared to say in any company that I believe God is an
infinitely powerful, but equally gracious Person who values nothing
higher than the freedom, dignity, and individuality of His intelligent
creatures. He desires that their love, their faith, their worship, even
their willingness to listen and obey, may be freely given. And I believe
that is supported by a very great weight of evidence and demonstration.
Of course some may say, “That sounds like too much work, I don’t
have the time. Besides, isn’t faith a gift of God anyway? I rather like that
shortcut. Let me just go to bed not trusting God but praying, ‘please
give me faith,’ and wake up trusting Him with all my heart.” But put in
that way it doesn’t make any sense, does it? Now faith is indeed a gift
of God. But that doesn’t mean there is some shortcut to faith! We need
to understand the gift of faith in the larger context of Scripture. Look at
Galatians 5:22, KJV: “But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith.” No question about it, faith comes
with the Spirit. But how does the Holy Spirit do this? How does He lead
us to trust in God? Look at 2 Peter 1:20–21, NEB:
But first note this: no one can interpret any prophecy of
Scripture by himself. For it was not through any human whim that
men prophesied of old; men they were, but impelled by the Holy Spirit,
they spoke the words of God.
Here’s another translation, just to show the variation with essentially
the same meaning:
You must understand this in the first place, that no prophecy in
Scripture can be understood through one’s own powers, for no prophecy ever originated in the human will, but under the influence of the
Holy Spirit men spoke for God (Goodspeed).
The meaning of the word “prophet” is someone who speaks for God, but
whether these prophets spoke for their own time or about the future,
they couldn’t do it without the Holy Spirit.
Jesus Himself gives an explanation of the work of the Holy Spirit in
John, chapters 14–16. The title He uses for the Holy Spirit has been variously translated Comforter, Counselor, Advocate and Helper:
I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Helper, who
will stay with you forever. He is the Spirit, who reveals the truth about
God. . . . The Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my
name, will teach you everything and make you remember all that I
have told you. . . . The Helper will come— the Spirit, who reveals the
truth about God and who comes from the Father. I will send him to
you from the Father, and he will speak about me. . . . When, however,
the Spirit comes, who reveals the truth about God, he will lead you
into all the truth. John 14:16–17, 26; 15:26; 16:13, GNT.
It is clear from the above texts that all three members of the
Godhead are involved in the same work. Jesus’ unique role in that work
is the focus of John 5:39 (GNT), which describes the purpose of
Scripture: “You study the Scriptures, because you think that in them you
will find eternal life. And these very Scriptures speak about me!” You
see, Christ came to reveal the truth about God. The Holy Spirit comes
for the same purpose. The record of Christ’s revelation is in the Bible.
The Holy Spirit is the One who moved some of our fellow believers to
write the record. And the Spirit helps us to understand the record. The
Holy Spirit even helps us to pray as we read (Romans 8:26–27).
So if we desire to know God, and learn the answers to the questions in the Great Controversy; if we want to see Christ; if we want to
be open to the work of the Holy Spirit; if we want to let Him lead us
into truth; there is only one way, and that is to read the Bible. As we
read all sixty-six books we will discover the truth of Hebrews 1. God
was demonstrating His character in many and various ways over a long
period of time and under a great variety of circumstances:
In many and various ways God spoke of old to our fathers by the
prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son.
Hebrews 1:1–2, RSV.
You don’t find claims in there. You find demonstration, over many
centuries of time and certainly under a great variety of circumstances.
The very length of the sixty-six books speaks well of our God. The Bible
itself demonstrates that God is not trying to lead us to trust Him without evidence. If God offered us only claims, the Bible would be just a
paragraph long. But instead, the Infinite One has chosen to win His family by being a humble teacher. He stoops to meet us where we are, speaking a language we can understand. He leads us no faster than we are able
to follow and runs amazing risks of being misunderstood. A teacher like
that can be trusted.
Of course all of this assumes that the Bible itself can be trusted.
And there are legitimate questions one can raise about this book. Do we
have the right collection of sixty-six books? Have the words of those
books been accurately preserved? Have those words been adequately
translated into all the versions that we have today? And most of all, can
we be confident that we know the meaning of the Bible?
• • • • •
God stoops to meet us where we are, speaking a language we
can understand. He leads us no faster than we are able to
follow and runs amazing risks of being misunderstood. A
teacher like that can be trusted.
• • • • •
In the next chapter, we will look at that topic briefly. I’ve spent
some forty years concentrating on that subject, trying to equip myself to
use all the tools for determining whether the Bible can be trusted and
whether we can confidently understand the meaning. All I can say is I
am absolutely convinced. But don’t believe it because I say so. God
wouldn’t want it that way! I can only bear my testimony. I believe that
God can indeed be trusted, and not just in some general way. He can be
trusted specifically in those areas where He has been accused. He can be
trusted never to be arbitrary, vengeful, exacting, unforgiving, or severe.
But He doesn’t expect us to come to that conclusion without evidence.
His existence, His character, the truthfulness of His word, are all established by a great amount of evidence. And it is evidence that appeals to
our reason. This is God’s way of restoring trust, and a God like that can
surely be trusted!
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: I was struck by “the evidence is in the stories.”
That’s an interesting way to look at the Good Book.
Graham Maxwell: That’s why it isn’t childish to read the stories.
Adults might ask, “Why read Samson anymore?” They don’t know
what to do with Samson; yet they hope the children do.
Lou: It’s strange how we’ve gotten things turned around. Another
statement that you made, Graham, “there’s no shortcut to faith,” struck
me as very important. You’ve talked repeatedly about trust and faith.
But I think many of us still have the feeling that faith involves a kind of
blind trust. You need faith when you don’t have enough evidence. You
just go ahead and believe. I wish you’d comment a bit more about that.
Graham: Well, I wonder who’s given that idea such circulation. It
seems to me that only the adversary would be pleased with us saying to
God, “I trust You, but I really don’t have any evidence for doing so.” I’d
rather say, “God, there’s so much evidence, and I’m still studying it. But
the more I come to know You, the more I trust You.” One reason for the
confusion on this issue is the use of different English words; trust is one
thing, confidence is another, faith is still another. Yet all three English
words translate the same original word in the Bible.
Lou: But still, some very sincere people have talked about faith as a
leap in the dark. You go as far as you can on evidence, and then you come
to that cliff where you just close your eyes and jump, and hope that you
land safely.
• • • • •
History is strewn with the wreckage of those who have been
leaping in the dark.
• • • • •
Graham: Well that’s the trouble. I think history is strewn with the
wreckage of those who have been leaping in the dark. Now God might
ask me to do something I momentarily cannot understand, like He did
with Abraham. But if I have full confidence in One I know very well, I
move forward. I even know He won’t be angry if I question Him along
the way. I wouldn’t call that a leap in the dark.
Many define faith in that way because they think they really are in
the dark. Even some distinguished theologians believe that God has
never really revealed Himself to us. Christ came as the light, yet they
feel in the dark. They don’t really believe in a personal God who reveals
Himself. We need to exercise blind faith because we have no other
choice. Now I admire them for taking life so seriously in the dark. But
I’m not going to say my faith in God is a leap in the dark. Faith is the
most enlightened, intelligent, rational decision we ever make, and one
for which we have the most evidence. I hesitate to say this, but I have
more evidence for trusting God than I have for trusting even you, my
friend. That’s true, isn’t it?
Lou: Well, I do think that’s true. Somewhat related to this is a question regarding Deuteronomy 13 (particularly verses 1–3). That passage
warns against signs and wonders. And yet when we look in the gospels
and the story of Jesus, aren’t the miracles that He performed a basis for
belief?
Graham: In the story about the wedding at Cana John says, “This,
the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee.” John 2:11, RSV. And
these signs did say something, to be sure. His mother already trusted
Him. She said, “Do whatever He tells you.” John 2:5, RSV. I think miracles do get people started on the road to trust sometimes. But they are
not the best evidence, because miracles can be counterfeited, as happened in Egypt (Exodus 7:10–12, 20–22; 8:6–7). In some ways a miracle
is the poorest type of evidence. But if we’re susceptible to that kind of
evidence, our God will run the risk, sometimes, of using miracles.
Gideon’s wet fleece, and then the dry one, for example, doesn’t speak
well of Gideon, but the whole story does speak well of God, who gener-
ously gave him those signs (Judges 6:36–40). God would rather Gideon
had weighed the evidence. To summarize, God did not avoid using miracles in Bible times, but they are an elementary first step in developing
faith, and a hazardous one.
Lou: So the Deuteronomy 13 passage is pointing out the hazard
there.
Graham: Yes. Because at the same time false prophets are performing miracles, they are not telling the truth. When I’m watching television programs where there is a focus on miracles and faith-healing, I listen to hear what they are saying about God. And if they are not telling
the truth about God, then never mind those miracles. But I notice that
the audience is often being so swayed by the miracles, they are not prepared to open their Bibles and do some hard study of the truth. That’s
the danger in miracles, they are so dramatic.
Lou: You talked about faith as a gift. I remember the man who was
worried about his boy and said to Jesus, “Lord, I believe. Help thou mine
unbelief.” Mark 9:24, KJV. What does God do to help unbelief in a situation like that?
Graham: The father obviously did believe; he just wished he had
more faith. Whether the man understood how God would increase his
faith, the text doesn’t say. We have to look through the rest of Scripture
to fill that out. My understanding is that God strengthens faith by offering evidence, by helping us to think about the evidence, and by protecting us from the adversary who would becloud our minds and deprive us
of our freedom to weigh the evidence. Sometimes the Holy Spirit even
adds to our understanding directly. I don’t mind the Holy Spirit
impressing me, God works in many and various ways. It’s just when I
feel an impression, I want to make sure it’s the Holy Spirit, and not what
I had for supper.
Lou: I hear you saying God doesn’t pop a pill into our mouth.
Developing faith is a process that involves our thinking and our understanding.
Graham: We want shortcuts. I think that was the appeal at the tree
in the garden, when Eve was told, “Eat this fruit and you will be like
God” (Genesis 3:5). It was as if she said, “I thought sanctification was the
work of a lifetime. And you can do it with one bite?” A similar approach
happens sometimes in evangelism. “Go down to the front, and you will
be saved.” We are always wanting shortcuts, busy people that we are.
Instant salvation is rather attractive. So is instant faith. But things don’t
actually work that way.
Lou: Here’s a question that takes us back to the great controversy
perspective: the war in heaven. “Why doesn’t God take more firm control of the universe — even at the expense of a little freedom? Isn’t the
price of freedom almost too much? With all the pain and the tragedy that
happens in our world, couldn’t God have done a better job of protecting
us from the consequences of freedom?”
Graham: I remember years ago a lady came up after a meeting, and
she said, “I’d be willing to give up some of my freedom to have peace
and security once again; to be safe. I wish God had not given me quite
so much freedom.” Like today, to be safe from terrorists on the plane,
we’re willing to stand in line and go through those electronic devices.
We give up some of our freedom in order to be safe. Would we say to
God, if we had the chance, “I know You’ve paid a great price for freedom, but I’d rather not be that free”?
I imagine God might say in return, “Well, I’m sorry. That’s one
thing that is not negotiable. I will keep My universe free, or your trust
and love will mean nothing. Yes, I could save everybody your way, but
it would turn My universe into a penitentiary.” You see, if God locked
us up in solitary confinement so we couldn’t hurt each other, He could
save everybody. But instead God says, “I refuse to be a prison warden
for the rest of eternity. Forgive Me, but I would rather die than give up
freedom.” And He has already died to show what freedom means to
Him.
Lou: Something you said reminds me of another question that I
should ask. If God is all-powerful, why isn’t He able or willing to save
everyone? You’ve mentioned how this approach might turn the whole
universe into a prison house. But isn’t there a way God can lovingly save
everybody?
Graham: Well, if salvation just meant admitting us into the
Kingdom, He could. He has the power to do that. He even has the
power to put us all in terrorized subjection, and then have us grumbling
for the rest of eternity. What human father would want that for his
family? No matter how powerful a father is, he cannot enforce love and
trust in his family. You cannot terrorize your children into a happy
home. It just doesn’t work. They may behave as long as you’re around
because you scare them so, but once they’ve grown up and gone their
own ways, they will do what they wish. So I think people who have families and teachers of children are in a position to understand what God is
trying to do. He is omnipotent, to be sure. But you cannot produce love
and trust by force. It simply can’t be done; hence the length of the experiment, and the extent of the Scriptures.
Lou: Here’s another question: “If Satan was the first creature to
rebel, where did the idea of sin originate? Or was there sin before Satan
sinned?”
Graham: Well, there’s no record of there being any sin before
Lucifer. According to the biblical record, the whole diabolical thing was
created within the mind of the most magnificent of all God’s beings
(Isaiah 14:12–14). It wasn’t that he lacked intelligence, or that he had a
bent toward evil, or that he didn’t know God. He lived in the presence
of God. He knew what God was like. In fact, I think he knew God so
well that he dared entertain these thoughts without fear. He knew how
gracious God was. That is what makes his rebellion so diabolical, so
utterly rebellious. And of course it’s also insane, that a creature would
think that he could be equal with God. He even asked his creator to get
down on His knees and worship him (Matthew 4:8–9). This whole insane
thing was created in the mind of Lucifer himself. But maybe if we could
explain sin, we could find some excuse for it, some rationalization.
Lou: When you say “created in the mind of Lucifer;” you don’t
mean God created it there, do you?
Graham: No, Lucifer did it all by himself. We are quite capable of
that too. But there’s something good in it. While God is not the author
of sin, He has actually created us capable of thinking things like that up.
When He made us free, He made us creative like Himself, and what a risk
He took in doing that! Evidently freedom means everything to God. So
even the terrible thing Lucifer did speaks well of God. In light of that,
how could I say to God, “Take some freedom back from me”?
Lou: This same person went on to ask, “Does Satan really think
he’s going to win in the end? Or does he know he’ll lose, and he’s just
trying to take down as many people as he can?”
Graham: I think that’s rather well said. When Hitler realized he
had lost the war, he announced that he would take the whole Third
Reich down with him. And the world said, “He’s mad. He’s a maniac.”
I also believe that when Lucifer realized that he had lost the war — and
Revelation says that he knows that he has but a short time left
(Revelation 12:12) — he dedicated himself to taking down with him as
many as he could.
Lou: The question has come up in connection with Revelation 12
(verses 7–8), where it speaks about Michael and His angels. Someone
wanted to know a bit more about Michael. Who was Michael?
Graham: It’s good to raise the question; because in the Apocrypha
there are a number of suggestions as to who Michael might be. But in
the Bible all the references to Michael the archangel point in one direction. For example, it says in Thessalonians that the dead will arise at the
voice of the archangel (1 Thessalonians 4:16), but the gospels say they
will arise at the voice of the Son of Man (Christ — John 5:28). Jude 1:9,
then, not only connects “the” archangel with Michael, it connects the
archangel Michael with the resurrection of Moses. This combination of
texts ties the archangel, Christ and Michael together as the same person.
But there is more to it than that. The name Michael means “who is
like God,” or “the one who is like God.” And the name is only used of
Christ in places like Daniel, Revelation and Jude, where the Great
Controversy is involved. So when the leader of the loyal side is referred
to, He is called “the one who is like God,” Michael. The leader on the
other side would like to be like God, but is not (see 2 Thessalonians 2:4
and Revelation 13:4). So I like it that Jesus is called Michael when He is
operating in the great controversy setting.
Lou: That’s an interesting play on words there. We now have two
questions from different individuals about perfection. Let me read
through them rather quickly. First: “You said that as trust in God grows,
we behave more like God. That is, we move more toward being God-like
or being perfect. Can we be perfect in this present world? If not, when
can we expect to be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect? If we can
be perfect here, can we be recognized as being perfect, and will everyone
have the same degree of perfection?” Let me add this one: “You mentioned that when we get to heaven we might possibly have a lot to learn.
Does this mean that while we are sinless, or perfect, we can still make
mistakes?” People want to know about perfection.
Graham: Fortunately we will deal with this at some length in
Chapter Fourteen, “God Can Completely Heal the Damage Done.”
Some may want to read ahead. I think these are important questions,
because a misunderstanding of perfection is a heavy burden and puts
God in a very bad light. Now I believe God can perfectly heal the damage done by sin. No question about it. And perfection also needs to be
understood in terms of maturity and growing up. We will need to be so
settled into the truth that we can survive the time of trouble before the
End. But as far as mistakes are concerned, a mistake is not a sin. In the
hereafter, you could plant your pomegranate tree too close to where you
are living, and the Lord may come by later and say, “You know, you put
it too close, didn’t you? You might as well move it.” That is not a sin.
Sin is rebelliousness. Sin is distrust. Sin is not “making mistakes.”
Lou: But if God is waiting for us to grow up in Him, won’t He have
to wait forever? Because there are always people being converted; is that
why time goes on? When are we going to grow up?
Graham: It’s true that there will be conversions right along, and
we might wonder how a child in the faith could grow up to this maturity
that we talked about. If God is not going to allow the closing events to
occur until He has a generation like Job, mature enough in the truth to
pass through the “time of trouble,” He might be waiting a long time. But
I think we have assumed it takes a very, very long time to grow up from
rebirth to maturity. Yet when Paul wrote to the Ephesians, he suggested
that they could have been grown up much sooner (Ephesians 4:11–16).
A few years later in Hebrews he said, “By now you should be teachers, but I see you are still babes in the truth” (Hebrews 5:12–13). I think
that we should encourage people to believe they can grow up from
rebirth to maturity much sooner; and it would be a much more exciting
experience. You know, when we’re baptized, many of us think, “I’ve
launched myself on sixty-five years of slow sanctification.” Instead, I’d
like to think, “Why not grow up as quickly as possible and be settled
into the truth?” But when we have an unreachable, forbidding conception of perfection, we think “Well, I’m not going to make it anyway.”
In my understanding, the biblical concept of perfection is when an
individual is completely convinced of this truth about God. You don’t
need to be sixty-five years old to be convinced, that could happen even
at the age of twelve. If Satan came to a convinced twelve-year-old as an
angel of light, or even as “Christ,” and said God is arbitrary, vengeful,
unforgiving and severe; they would respond, “That’s not true and I will
not believe it.” Perfection is being so settled in the truth about God that
we cannot be moved. And it needn’t take a long time to happen. I think
we have made the distance between the start and the finish line too great.
Under the accelerating, energizing events of the close of time, God can
produce a generation of grown-up Jobs of all ages in a short period of
time.
Lou: It strikes me that when it comes to spiritual growth, we tend
too easily to think of performance. But when you have the issues clearly
in mind, growth is in terms of trust. And that could happen very quickly
if you were willing to really examine the evidence.
One final question to conclude this chapter: “Was the thief’s trust
developed only by the words and circumstances around the cross, or was
it the culmination of years of searching and being prepared by the Holy
Spirit?” What about the thief on the cross?
Graham: Oh, I like what that implies. We don’t know how much
the thief knew about Christ, but he surely must have known some
things about Him. Based on the rest of Scripture, you know the Holy
Spirit was working on that man. Christ is the Light which enlightens
everyone who comes into the world ( John 1:9). But when the thief was
hanging on the cross, he saw the most incredible evidence of what God
is like. Though the man was cursing and swearing, the Holy Spirit was
developing tenderness inside and a willingness to listen. Under the influence of the Holy Spirit his attention was pointed to the One in the middle, the One who said, “Look after Mother,” and, “Father forgive.” And
that experience is what finally won him.
Lou: In the next chapter we’ll explore whether the evidence of the
Bible itself can be trusted.
