Chapter Twelve
God’s Law Is No Threat to Our Freedom
Is there anything more precious to intelligent human beings than freedom? Freedom from tyranny, freedom from fear, freedom to do the
things we want to do? The good news is that God values nothing higher
than our freedom. But not all His children have believed this. In fact,
Satan persuaded one-third of the brilliant angels that this is not true
about our God; that He is instead arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. And how God has had to work in Scripture and history
to make it clear that He is not the kind of person His enemies have made
Him out to be!
• • • • •
Love and trust, the things that God desires the most, cannot
be commanded or produced by force. Nor can they be made
an obligation, something that we owe to God because He’s
been so good to us.
• • • • •
We have seen that war broke out in heaven, the war that we call the
Great Controversy. This war has continued and extended to this planet.
This is not primarily a war in the military sense, it is a “war of words,”
between Satan’s lies and the truth about God. For thousands of years
now, God has sought to reveal the truth about this matter; not in claims,
but with the evidence of demonstration. Yet many people in this world
still believe Satan’s lies. Even among very devout religious people —
even among Christians, who of all people should know better — many
still believe Satan’s lies. And so the war continues.
Jesus, Paul and Moses all agree that love is the fulfillment of God’s
law. But love and trust, the things that God desires the most, cannot be
commanded or produced by force. Nor can they be made an obligation,
something that we owe to God because He’s been so good to us. God
wants more than this, and so should we! Our heavenly Father values
nothing higher than the freedom of His family, and Jesus suffered and
died to prove it. But if real freedom requires mutual love and trust based
on evidence, why does God seem to command our love in the Decalogue?
• • • • •
What kind of friendship is it that demands obedience?
• • • • •
In the previous chapter we considered some of the emergency
measures God has used to hold the family together while He continues
demonstrating the truth. Perhaps the most notable of these emergency
measures has been His use of law. And most notable among God’s laws
have been the Ten Commandments. But to many, God’s extensive use
of law seems opposed to freedom. It has indeed been seriously misunderstood. Confusion arises even from Jesus’ words to His disciples on this
subject. For example, in the Gospel of John Jesus said: “If you love me,
you will keep my commandments.” John 14:15, RSV. And He also said:
“You are my friends if you do what I command you.” John 15:14, RSV.
What kind of friendship is it that demands obedience? How do you combine “keep My commandments” with “you shall know the truth and
the truth shall set you free”? John 8:32, 36.
Misunderstandings of Law
Some have explained these texts to mean that we are free so long as
we do exactly what we are told. Have you parents ever tried that with
your children? “Now children, we want freedom in our home. We can
have freedom so long as you do exactly what you are told. Do I make
myself clear?” If your children are afraid of you enough, they will say,
“You have made yourself clear.” But inside they may have serious reservations. It seems such a contradiction. Of course, everything depends
upon how we understand what it is that God has actually asked us to do,
and how we understand the reason why He had to ask us in the first
place. I believe that all of God’s laws, particularly the Ten
Commandments, were given for our best good. They were actually
given to preserve freedom rather than to infringe upon it.
Law, and the use of law, however, have been seriously misunderstood throughout the Great Controversy. The most notable example of
such misunderstanding occurred about 1500 years after Sinai, when the
Son of God lived among a people to whom He had entrusted the Ten
Commandments. Of all people, they should have understood that the
Ten Commandments were an emergency measure. After all, when the
Ten Commandments were originally given, Moses was there to explain
that there was no need to be afraid of God or of His commandments
(Exodus 20:20). But when Jesus came, He found a group of people who
were totally preoccupied with God’s laws and with obedience to their
every detail.
Jesus never had to forbid the making of graven images when He
came. The Jews had learned their lesson in the discipline of Babylonian
captivity, and they never sank into ordinary idolatry again. He never had
to tell them which day was the Sabbath (John 5:10, 16, 18; 19:31). They
regarded it as their highest duty to obey every one of the Ten
Commandments. He never had to urge them to pay tithe. Matthew
records that they used to tithe even the tiniest things; the seeds of mint,
anise, and cumin (Matthew 23:23). Nor did Jesus have to tell them they
should obey the laws of hygiene. He commented on the fact that they
would even strain gnats out of their goat’s milk lest they should eat a forbidden insect (Matthew 23:24). Nor did He ever have to tell them to
search the Scriptures. They did it all the time — though they did it for
the wrong reason (John 5:39). Nor did He ever have to tell them to be
careful in their association with unbelievers. In fact, when they came in
from the marketplace, they used to wash themselves in certain special,
ceremonial ways, lest they be contaminated by association with the
Gentiles (Mark 7:4; John 2:6). You see, they all could say, like the rich
young ruler: “All these things we have obeyed from our youth up”
(Matthew 19:20; Luke 18:21).
• • • • •
All of God’s laws, particularly the Ten Commandments,
were given for our best good. They were actually given to
preserve freedom rather than to infringe upon it.
• • • • •
You would think that Jesus would be pleased in the face of such rigorous obedience and willingness to do precisely what they were told.
You would also think they would recognize and welcome Him when He
came. But all heaven watched the incredible scene of those who claimed
to love God’s law denouncing the Lawgiver as a lawbreaker. It must have
puzzled the angels a great deal. Jesus told them that while they were
working hard to obey, they were obeying for the wrong reason
(Matthew 5:20 and 23:28 in context). Because they were obeying for the
wrong reason, they were really not obeying at all. You can imagine how
offensive this idea was to them. In fact, He went even further. He suggested that if they had truly known the God who had given the law,
they would have kept the law for an entirely different reason. That
would have made it possible for them to be both obedient and free at
the same time (John 5:39–40; 8:32, 36).
The Old Testament prophets had dealt with this centuries before.
Just to mention two, Amos and Isaiah had chided the people for their
very reluctant Sabbath keeping. Amos recorded their words, “Oh, when
will the Sabbath be past that we may buy and sell and get gain?” Amos
8:5. Isaiah deplores their mechanical, unthinking obedience, particularly
on the Sabbath:
The Lord said, “These people claim to worship me, but their
words are meaningless and their hearts are somewhere else. Their religion is nothing but human rules and traditions, which they have simply memorized.” Isaiah 29:13, GNT.
Or, as one translation has it: “Their worship of me is but the commandments of men learned by rote.” Isaiah 29:13, RSV. And rote, unthinking
worship is an insult to our intelligent God.
The Teaching and Example of Jesus
So Jesus set out to tell the truth about His Father and the kind of
obedience that is really pleasing to Him. He often did so at great risk on
the Sabbath. You would think it was all innocent and good. He simply
healed people and helped them on the Sabbath. But those gloomy legalists were shocked and they denounced Him for disobeying the law.
Think of it! The Lawgiver was being denounced as a lawbreaker! “No,”
Jesus responded, “I am not come to destroy the law and the prophets”
(which meant not just the Ten Commandments, but the whole Old
Testament), “I have not come to destroy them, I have come to fulfill
them” (based on Matthew 5:17). In other words, He had come to explain
their deeper meaning in both word and action.
By teaching and example, especially on the Sabbath, Jesus set out
to correct these misunderstandings of God’s law and to explain what it
was all about. He said the law was given for you. Especially was the
Sabbath given for you, to be an advantage, not a restriction. He said this
as He defended the right of the disciples to pluck some ears of grain, rub
them in their hands, and eat them (Mark 2:23). “The Sabbath was made
for you — you weren’t made for the Sabbath” (Mark 2:27). Jesus was
telling them, in essence, “The Sabbath that you work so hard to keep
and which has become such a burden to you, was given to help you, not
to be a restriction and certainly not to be a mere test of obedience. If
only you knew the truth about God and His laws, you would find that
His yoke is easy, and His burden is light.” Look at those famous words
in Matthew:
Come to me, all of you who toil and are burdened, and I will let
you rest. Let my yoke be put upon you, and learn from Me, for I am
gentle and humble-minded, and your hearts will find rest, for the yoke
I offer you is a kindly one, and the load I ask you to bear is light.
Matthew 11:28–30, Goodspeed.
Jesus came gently and humbly to them, even though He was God
Himself. You would think the people would be relieved to hear all this
right from headquarters. Instead, they accused the Son of God of blasphemously misrepresenting His Father. They even said that it was the
Devil who made Him talk about God and His laws like this! John 8:48.
And so they condemned Him as lawless and crucified Him as a heretic.
The Experience and Teaching of Saul/Paul
A little while later Saul of Tarsus took up the cause of those who
had denounced Jesus as a heretic and who had denounced His picture of
God as false and satanic. Saul did this because he too obeyed God for the
wrong reason. He worshiped a tyrannical God who would be pleased to
see people persecuted, imprisoned, and even stoned to death — to force
them to obey. That was the kind of God he worshiped. And he conducted his evangelism in the name of that God. It was Saul’s picture of God
that moved him to use so much force. And he had many texts (or so he
thought) to support it.
It was on the Damascus road that he finally saw the light, and the
truth set him free (John 8:32). What a difference! He didn’t change his
Bible or even the name of his God. He didn’t change the day he worshiped, or his diet, or his dress. What did he change that day? All Saul
changed was his picture of God. And who has spoken more eloquently
about freedom and faith and grace than the Saul who became Paul? Even
further, he presented Christ as the end of legalism (based on Romans
10:4). We’re not under law, we’re under grace, because we worship a gracious God! Romans 6:14.
Paul went on to say, “Don’t misunderstand me in my new emphasis,
do you think my emphasis on love, trust, and freedom abolishes the law?”
Faith does not abolish the law. Faith establishes the law by putting it in
its proper perspective (based on Romans 3:31). In other words, when you
really trust God, you love and admire Him for His wise and gracious
ways. You are perfectly willing to listen to everything God has to say,
and to give careful heed to all of His instructions. It’s only wise and sensible to do so, once you’re convinced God is that kind of a person.
Why Then the Law?
Why does a God who desires His children to enjoy dignity and
freedom make so much use of law? Paul explains this in Galatians 3, as we
noted in the previous chapter. Law was added as an emergency measure
because we needed it (based on Galatians 3:19). The law was added to be
our guardian, to guide us back to a right relationship with God
(Galatians 3:25). A right relationship with God means we will do what is
right because it is right and not because we are being ordered to. The
Greek word for “guardian” is paidagogos, which means “leader of children.” The law was designed for people who behave like children. As
rebellious, disorderly and immature sinners, we have needed the guidance and protection of God’s laws. Behind all those regulations, we can
see a very gracious God who has used all these emergency measures for
our best good. There is nothing arbitrary about them. They make very
good sense and they deserve to be intelligently obeyed.
• • • • •
What God really wants is not mere obedience to the rules;
He wants us to do what is right because it is right.
• • • • •
This is even more apparent when we look precisely at what our
God has asked us to do, particularly in the Ten Commandments. But
more than that, we must understand why we needed to be instructed by
these emergency measures:
We know, of course, that the Law is good in itself and has a legitimate function. Yet we also know that the Law is not really meant for
the good man, but for the man who has neither principles nor self-control. 1 Timothy 1:8–9, Phillips.
If you have self-control, you don’t need to be ordered to behave. But the
law does not give us self-control. Rather, it is an emergency measure
because we lack self-control. We need it until we can recover self-control
and love and trust. Then we are able to use our freedom in the right way.
This is what Paul explained to the Galatian believers, who were
prone to misunderstanding God’s use of law. Galatians 5:13–23 as a
whole is a magnificent passage, but we will focus on Paul’s understanding of God’s use of law:
You, my brothers, were called to be free. . . . The entire law is
summed up in a single command: “Love your neighbor as yourself. . . .”
But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under law. . . . But the fruit
of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control. Galatians 5:13–14, 18, 22–23, NIV.
“Faithfulness” means that we can be trusted, and “self-control” is
the real meaning of the word “temperance” in the King James Version.
Some people would prefer that God command and control them for the
rest of eternity. That seems humble and safe, but it is also telling God
that we don’t want the freedom that He has paid such a high price to
protect. In light of the cross, how can we hand our freedom back and say,
“No, I don’t want self-control. I want You to control me”? But God
offers something marvelously better, “When you are fully under the
influence of My Holy Spirit, I won’t control you. You will have recovered the dignity and joy of self-control.” Then we really will have freedom once again.
Love Is the Fulfilling of the Law
This idea that “love is the fulfilling of the law” (based on Galatians
5:14 and Romans 13:10) was certainly not new with Paul. Jesus had said
the same thing to the inquiring lawyer (Matthew 22:35–40). But the first
person to say it was actually Moses. Jesus and Paul were both quoting
Moses, the man who was instrumental in giving the Commandments in
the first place: “Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all
your soul and with all your strength.” Deuteronomy 6:5, NIV. That is
one half of it. Notice the other half in Leviticus: “Do not hate your brother in your heart. . . . But love your neighbor as yourself.” Leviticus 19:17–
18, NIV. Jesus quoted that directly from Moses (Matthew 22:37). But
you cannot really command things like love, can you? You cannot command “not hating your brother in your heart” either (based on Matthew
5:21–22; 1 John 2:11; 3:15; 4:20). But when people are misbehaving, you
may say it that way as an emergency measure. But that is all it is. It
doesn’t provide the lasting motivation that God desires.
Even love is not always clearly understood. The love that fulfills the
law “is patient and kind . . . is not jealous or boastful . . . is not arrogant or
rude. Love does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful;
it does not rejoice at wrong, but rejoices in the right.” 1 Corinthians
13:4–6, RSV. Imagine living in a community where everyone lives as
described in the Ten Commandments, where everybody loves God and
loves everybody else! It would mean that no one is ever rude, arrogant,
or impatient. No one insists on having his own way. Can you imagine living in such a community? Would you be free in that environment?
• • • • •
In eternity we will live in a place where people not only
never do wrong, they will never even want to.
• • • • •
Look at the details of the Decalogue (Exodus 20:13–16). No one ever
steals. No one ever kills. No one ever hates. No one ever lies. Everyone
can be trusted. And even more than that, look at number ten (Exodus
20:17). People not only never do anything wrong — no one even wants
to. That’s the meaning of the coveting commandment, number ten, the
one that bothered Paul so much at first (Romans 7:7–11). He thought God
was interfering too much when He got in that deep. But that is the mindset that really guarantees our freedom, as Paul eventually learned
(Galatians 5:22–23). In eternity we will live in a place where people not
only never do wrong, they will never even want to. That means they
have really been healed.
Even more than that, imagine living in a community where everyone loves and reveres the same God (Exodus 20:3). Every member of
God’s family will admire the God who values nothing higher than the
freedom of His children and who has paid such a high price to prove it.
They will worship a God who asks for nothing more than mutual love
and trust. The unity of love and trust will be based on the fact that we
all love and worship the same God. When you have a group of people
who live like that, you have real freedom, real peace, and real security.
Seen in that light, the Decalogue is a guarantee of freedom. For God says,
“I will always run My universe this way. I’d rather die than change it.”
Some of us say, “God, please, do not change it. Please, always run
Your universe in harmony with the principles of the Ten
Commandments, or we won’t be really safe and free.” But there will be
one major difference in eternity. When the emergency is over, there will
be no need for God to tell us to love each other and to be decent neighbors. The Spirit of Truth will have convinced us that it is only right and
sensible to behave like that. That’s the meaning of the law being written
in our hearts, where we do our thinking (Jeremiah 31:31–34; Hebrews
8:8–12). That means we have thought this through. We agree with God.
That’s the best way to live. That’s the best way to run the universe. It
is right, and that means that our self-control has been restored.
Law, Freedom and the Sabbath
There’s just one commandment that doesn’t seem to fit in to this
picture. Can the seventh-day Sabbath be regarded as a guarantee of freedom? Isn’t the Sabbath a restriction of our freedom? That was a key
point in Chapter Ten of this book, entitled “The Reminder of the
Evidence.” If the Sabbath is an arbitrary test of our obedience, it doesn’t
fit in to this good news we have been talking about. But, in fact, the purpose of the Sabbath is to remind us of the freedom given to us in the
Garden of Eden, to remind us how God set His people free from
Egyptian bondage, and how Jesus died on crucifixion Friday. The
Sabbath sets us free more than any other commandment, by telling us
there is no need to be afraid of God. Understood in this way, keeping the
seventh-day Sabbath does fit in to the larger picture, for we need to be
reminded of these truths that are the basis of our freedom.
God gave the Sabbath to help us, not to test our obedience. Look at
Isaiah’s understanding of the Sabbath:
If you cease to tread the Sabbath underfoot, and keep my holy day
free from your own affairs, if you call the Sabbath a day of joy and
the Lord’s holy day a day to be honoured, if you honour it by not plying
your trade, not seeking your own interest or attending to your own
affairs, then you shall find your joy in the Lord. Isaiah 58:13–14,
NEB.
Joy is one of the gifts of the Spirit of Truth. And what is the truth that
makes the Sabbath a day of joy? It is the truth about our God. God
invites and urges us to take time to listen, to remember, and to consider
all the truths about God that the Sabbath represents. Then we will find
the joy that comes from knowing this truth about our God. That’s the
kind of joy we will have for the rest of eternity. That is how the Sabbath
fits in to the larger picture.
The “Why” of Obedience
If you were ever asked to explain why you obey God (assuming that
you do), what answer would you give? First, would you say, “I do what
I do as a believer because God has told me to, and He has the power to
reward and destroy”? Is that why you don’t lie and murder? It is good
you don’t do those things, and such obedience might be all right for a
beginner or for a little child, but it makes God’s laws seem so arbitrary.
It implies that they make no sense in themselves. That kind of obedience
does not speak well of God’s character and government.
Second, would it be better to say, “I do what I do as a believer,
because God has told me to, and I love Him and want to please Him”?
Is that why you don’t steal or commit adultery? You don’t see anything
wrong or harmful in these things, it’s just that God doesn’t like it when
you do that. He has been so good to you, surely you owe it to Him to do
the things He has asked you to do, whether or not they make sense. It
might be an improvement on obeying out of fear or the desire for a
reward, but it still smacks of arbitrariness. It still does not speak well of
God, though the second motivation is often thought to be the antidote
to the first one.
Third, what would you think of saying this instead? “I do what I
do because more and more I am finding it to be right and sensible to do
so. I would want to do it even if He didn’t tell me to. I admire and
revere the One who advised and even commanded me in the days of my
ignorance and immaturity. Being still somewhat ignorant and immature,
I am willing to trust and obey the One whose counsel has always proved
to be very sensible, even when He tells me to do something beyond my
present understanding.” That attitude accepts that God is not arbitrary.
Everything He has asked us to do makes such good sense, we would
want to do it anyway. If you can say that, then truly God’s law is not a
threat to your freedom, and you will thank Him for it.
In this context, we should look at the book of James. James is
thought by some to be the legalist among the New Testament writers.
But look at what he says in James 2:
If you really keep the royal law found in Scripture, “Love your
neighbor as yourself,” you are doing right. . . . Speak and act as those
who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom. James 2:8,
12, NIV.
Even Luther didn’t understand James in that way. But James knew that
true obedience is no threat to our freedom.
I am adding a quote from Ellen G. White, whom some of us regard
as a real friend of God. This is one of her many descriptions of real obedience:
The man who attempts to keep the commandments of God
from a sense of obligation, merely because he is required to do so,
will never enter into the joy of obedience. In fact, he does not obey.
. . . True obedience is the outworking of a principle within. It springs
from the love of righteousness, the love of the law of God. The
essence of all righteousness is loyalty to our Redeemer. This will
lead us to do right because it is right — because right doing is pleasing to God. Ellen G. White, Christ’s Object Lessons, 97–98.
I believe that someday we will be able to stand in the presence of
God and say, “God, we would do all these things from here on, whether
You asked us to or not — because we agree with You that they are sensible and they are right.” And God could say, “That is good. At last
you’re free. You have learned the truth, and the truth will set you free
and keep you free.”
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: That was a beautiful statement at the end, and it
touches me deeply. But it seems to me that the very title of this chapter
implies that there are many sincere individuals who have seen God’s law
as a threat to our freedom. Many Christians feel that God’s law is something from which they want to be free. For example, I’ve heard people
quote Romans 10:4: “Christ is the end of the law.” Doesn’t that verse
imply freedom from the law? What does that text mean?
Graham Maxwell: I don’t think God wants us to stop loving, or
to be disorderly and live in chaos, do you? The text needs to be analyzed,
first for the words and then for the context. First of all, the word “end.”
One rare but possible meaning is “purpose;” Christ is the goal or purpose
of the law. But I doubt that’s the meaning in the context. I do think it
means termination, all right. Law here does not have an article in front of
it, so it is not referring to any particular law. Paul, all the way through
the book of Romans, is contrasting the obedience that springs from love
and trust with the obedience that springs from law. And the obedience
that springs from law is often the obedience that comes from fear, and
that can turn us into rebels even as we obey. So when Paul comes to
Romans 10:4, the meaning is “Christ is the termination of law as a way
of being saved.” Christ is the end of legalism. Phillips has a marvelous
rendering of that. “Christ means the end of the struggle for righteousness by works of law, that everyone who has faith in God may be saved.”
That’s beautifully done.
Lou: But along with a text like Romans 10:4, I think of the one in
Romans 6 which I could hear someone asking about. It says, “We are not
under the law, but under grace” (based on Romans 6:14). Isn’t that further evidence that freedom is not under the law but under grace?
Graham: Again, that depends on the meaning of being “under the
law.” People often explain that as meaning we’re not under the “condemnation” of the law. For Paul, I think, it has to do with our relationship with God. We’re not under law, we’re under grace. We are not
dealing with a legalistic God. We are dealing with a God who is graciousness personified. So Paul is saying, “If you realize that you are dealing
with a gracious God, it helps you get rid of sin.” Because when you’re
dealing with God in a legalistic manner, it actually provokes the very sin
you are trying to avoid.
You may remember that in Romans 7 Paul describes this very thing.
He says, “There was a day when I looked at the law and it provoked me
to sin. Especially commandment number ten irritated me (based on
Romans 7:7–11), until I realized God’s gracious purpose in giving it to
us. Now I delight in the law” (based on Romans 7:22 and 8:2). So one
really cannot understand law until one understands God’s gracious purpose, which means one has to know what He’s like. And that’s Paul’s
message. We do not deal with a God of legalism, but a God of graciousness. It makes all the difference in the world. It places the law in its proper context.
Lou: This reminds me of Paul’s statement in Romans 14:5.
Speaking in the context of the Sabbath he says, “Let everyone be persuaded in his own mind.” Isn’t that just leaving it up to personal choice?
What should we really make of this?
Graham: I wouldn’t want to leave the impression that you’re not
free to make up your own mind on any of the other commandments. It
seems to me that if we have not made up our own minds freely about
God, then our worship is worthless. “Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind” is the way God approaches us about everything He
asks us to do. It isn’t just with respect to the Sabbath. When it comes to
love, trust, obedience, you name it, we are free to make up our own
minds. That’s why He says, “Don’t go around condemning other people.” God does not condemn them. Everyone is free to make up their own
mind.
Lou: But God isn’t saying that all roads lead to the same place or
that it doesn’t matter what choice you make, is He?
Graham: No, He isn’t. The choice you make is very important, but
it must still be yours. God is not going to force you to do what is right
or what is best for you. Now before Paul knew God was gracious, before
the Damascus road, he would say, “I know some of you are wrong, and
I’m on my way to put you into prison and have you stoned.” But when
he wrote Romans, there was no more of that! He had learned that we are
not under the law but under grace (Romans 6:14).
Lou: In the opening part of this chapter, you seem convinced that
we need to be attentive to all ten of the commandments. But isn’t a person who is concerned about the law, who thinks a lot about the Ten
Commandments, a legalist? Isn’t that the meaning of legalism? A person
who thinks about the law? Shouldn’t we be thinking about Jesus rather
than about the law?
Graham: When people put it that way, it implies that a loving person is a legalist, since love is the fulfilling of the law. And that doesn’t
make sense. So I think we need to consider the real meaning of legalism.
I believe that the essence of legalism is preoccupation with our legal
standing before a legalistic God. Many Christians are preoccupied with
their legal standing, because they don’t really know God. Like the father
of the prodigal son, God is not thinking of our legal standing, He’s very
preoccupied with our welfare and whether or not we will come home. So
the essence of legalism is preoccupation with one’s legal standing
with God.
Lou: Are you saying a person could believe and accept Christ’s sacrifice in such a way that they would in effect be a legalist?
Graham: We should say this very carefully, but I really believe it’s
true. If you believe Jesus died primarily to adjust our legal standing with
a God who is preoccupied with our legal standing, you are a legalist.
And this means that you no longer take the blood of bulls and goats to
God to adjust your legal standing (Hebrews 9:12–14), you now take Him
the blood of His Son and say, “Will this adjust my legal standing?” And
in that perspective God would say, “That’s good; now you’ve brought
Me the right blood.” To me, this is legalism.
Lou: So you’re saying that if our purpose in approaching God is to
meet a legal requirement, it becomes a matter of legalism.
Graham: I would call that the Devil’s sad perversion. He has actually taken the death of Christ, which is a monument to freedom, and
turned it into a ceremony that adjusts our legal standing. In other words,
those who misunderstood the ceremonies in Old Testament times, but
then became Christians, applied the same misunderstanding to the cross
and to the blood of Christ. It’s just that now they had better blood and
more persuasiveness with the Father to adjust their legal standing. To
me, it sounds terrible to say that. It supports the Devil’s charges that
God is arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. You see, all
legalism is based on the concept that God has to execute those who disobey Him. Therefore, it follows that forgiveness will somehow take care
of that. And that’s what produces legalism.
Lou: I want to come back to a basic question that I’ve heard again
and again, “Must one obey God’s law to be saved?” You said the law is
not a threat to our freedom. But on the other hand, don’t I have to obey
it?
Graham: Maybe the safest way to approach that in a brief time is
to consider the word “obedience.” The biblical word means “to listen
humbly.” As Micah said, “All God asks of us is that we walk humbly
before our God” (based on Micah 6:8). The thief on the cross didn’t have
much time to live up to the many, many laws that had been used as
God’s emergency measures, but he certainly was humbly and gratefully
willing to listen to the One in the middle (Luke 23:39–43). And he died
willing to listen; sincerely, honestly, willing to listen. He will arise in
the same frame of mind. He has much to learn, but he’ll be a good disciple. That means he will be willing to listen, to accept instruction, and to
accept correction. Given enough time, he would learn that to obey
God’s law is to be loving.
Lou: In that case, do I have to be loving to be saved?
Graham: Jesus said to Nicodemus, “Unless you are born of the
Spirit, you will not be saved” (based on John 3:5). And the man who is
born of the Spirit, whose fruit is love and truth (Galatians 5:22–23), will
now have truth in the inner man (Ephesians 3:16). He will have a new
heart and a right spirit (Ezekiel 36:26–27). Yes, I would say that unless
one has at least the beginning of this experience of love and trustworthiness, he or she will not be saved. And that’s from 1 John. “Hereby we
know if we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren” (based on 1 John 3:14). I mean, unless we see the beginning of
a new regard for each other, we do not have the first symptom of salvation.
Lou: So, are you saying that I have to do this? I’m trying to find
out. Is there something I have to do to be saved?
Graham: We’ll cover that in a later chapter, the one on the matter
of perfection (Chapter Fourteen). Do I have to be perfect? I would say
perfection is not something God demands of us; it is something He offers
to us. He says, “I offer you a new heart. I offer you a right spirit. I offer
you healing. Do you want it?” If I don’t want it, I’m not savable. In fact
the word “save” in the Greek also means “to heal.” If I say I don’t want
to be healed, I don’t want to have a loving heart and truth in the inner
man, then I don’t want to be saved either. In any case, to put the Ten
Commandments on the wall in a mechanical sort of a way is to miss the
whole point.
Lou: Let me try it another way. Our subject in this chapter has to
do with a threat to our freedom. Now based on what you’ve said, let me
ask respectfully, “Am I really free if I have to love and obey; if, as you
put it, I need to listen? How can I think I am really free?”
Graham: Well, let’s put it this way. If we lived in a society where
we didn’t love each other and we couldn’t be trusted, there would be
no freedom. There can’t be freedom without trust. There can’t be freedom in a disorderly, chaotic, lawless society. It’s interesting how one can
phrase these things in such a way that it sounds like a burden, like a
restriction on our freedom.
But what is God asking us to do, anyway? I would say He is asking
us to love each other, to be trustworthy, to be safe, to be free. Who
would want to turn that down? You say, “Do I have to be free? Do I
have to be saved? Do I have to be healthy? Do I have to be well?” God
says, “No. I can’t command it, but I can offer it to you.” And some of us
say, “I’d like that very much.”
Lou: Jesus said, “Come to Me all you who labor and I will give you
rest.” But then He talks about learning and obedience. Then He says,
“My yoke is easy” (based on Matthew 11:28–30). Is this really easy? Is it
really light (Matthew 11:30)?
Graham: In comparison with the many rules and regulations the
Pharisees had, many of which made no sense, it was very light. And yet
Jesus said to them, “You have omitted the weightier matters in the law”
(Matthew 23:23). So in another sense, it’s heavy. Isn’t love weighty and
heavy in its importance? So there is a sense in which obedience is not
light.
I think what makes God’s commandments light is that they make
such good sense. They call for our intelligent obedience, and when I
obey something intelligently, I want to do it. It makes sense. It’s dumb
not to. And when I want to do it, the burden is gone. The text in
Matthew actually calls for complete commitment, but when I want to
do it, the “burden” is light (Matthew 11:28–30).
Lou: When we try to describe the kind of world we would like to
live in, we end up describing the world God has created us for.
Graham: Exactly.
Lou: What is the truth? You’ve been talking about the truth that
sets us free. Just remind us again, what is that truth?
Graham: In the legal model the truth is, “We’ve been forgiven and
we won’t have to go to hell.” But I think the truth that sets us free is
the truth about God, about the kind of person that He is.
Lou: Does forgiving a person set that person free?
Graham: There is a sense in which that’s true, but forgiveness by
itself doesn’t necessarily change the heart. Heaven will not be filled with
forgiven crooks.
Lou: But we’re still crooks.
Graham: We’re still crooks. So unless the heart is changed, there
will be no real freedom. This again brings up the difference between the
legal model and the healing/trust model. Supposing you had to keep rat
poison in your house, and you have a young son. And if he touches it
and then eats it, he could be very sick, he might even die. So you say,
“Son, don’t touch that rat poison. I’m going to put it on the highest
shelf, the high and locked cupboard.” A little later you hear a crash in
the garage and you run out, and there’s your son lying on the floor. He’s
taken the rat poison and he’s dying. Would it do any good at that point
to say, “Son, I forgive you, I forgive you!” He would die forgiven, but it
wouldn’t keep him from dying. Nor would it do any good to say, “Son,
I don’t want you to die, so let me drink the rat poison for you.” Then
you both would die. The boy doesn’t need forgiveness. He needs an
antidote. He needs healing.
Sin is like that poison. God has said, “You really don’t take Me seriously, do you? Sin is like a poison and will lead to your death. Let Me
take the poison and show you.” Jesus dies, and we discover that the poi-
son of sin is real. Nobody’s killing us. Sin is really a poison, and we are
dying. And when we realize the truthfulness of God’s warning, we will
take Him seriously from then on.
• • • • •
In the legal model the truth is, “We’ve been forgiven and we
won’t have to go to hell.” But I think the truth that sets us
free is the truth about God, about the kind of person that He
is.
• • • • •
The beauty is that God was then able to take His life back and come
out living. He had made His point. There was no legal requirement in
that. There was an awesome truth to be revealed. There was nothing
arbitrary about it. God does not want us to poison ourselves. We need
healing. We need to heed the warning. “The result of sin is death, don’t
do this thing.” That’s the healing model, not the legalistic model.
Lou: We’ve been dealing with questions that have come up in a general way. I’d like to move now to several specific questions: “Growing up
as an Adventist, I always thought the Sabbath would be one of the big
issues at the end of time. Is the Sabbath something we should hold onto
as a belief? Is it strong enough to die for, or is it a temporary emergency
measure just for the present?”
Graham: That is a very good question. Certainly the Great
Controversy is not over which day we worship. It’s over a commitment;
it’s over a great truth. And the meaning of the Sabbath speaks of that
truth, and that makes it an important issue. Those who meaningfully
observe the Sabbath in the last days will be publicly declaring that they
worship Christ as their God, and that the Father is just as gracious as the
Son. Apart from the meaning of the Sabbath, there’s not a very good
answer to that question. But in the light of its meaning, the Sabbath
could be a central issue of enormous consequence. And because of its
meaning, the Sabbath could be continued through eternity, because of all
there would be to remember in the hereafter. It is a monument to freedom.
Lou: The next question is a sample out of many similar questions:
“If God’s purpose is to restore a love relationship with His children,
how could asking them to kill an animal do this? In my opinion, this
would only tend to make people cruel and harden their hearts, rather
than create a loving, sympathetic spirit. It would seem to me that it
would reflect the cruel spirit of Satan rather than a loving, gracious
God.” This question has to do with God’s emergency measures in Old
Testament times. What about that?
Graham: Unfortunately, the sacrifices have had that effect. Many
people offered a sacrifice in hopes that God would love the smell, forgive them, and bless them. And it became a rather satanic thing. God
must have hated this emergency measure and hated that it had to be that
dramatic. It was certainly dramatic for Adam when he killed the first
lamb in order to be convinced that sin is serious; that it leads to death.
I wonder how hard he hit that lamb, and what did he hit it with? Not
hard enough to kill it, perhaps, just to hurt it. And he hit it harder.
Then blood appeared. He had never seen that before. And Adam turns
to God and says, “God, I’m not sure I can go on with this. It’s making
me sick.” And God says, “I hope it always makes you sick, every time.”
 But people became so accustomed to doing it that the historian
Josephus described it as almost like a circus, cutting the animals up and
brandishing them as they placed them on the altar to be burned. They
were serious about the ritual, but had forgotten the meaning. God chose
something that was rather awesome, and sometimes rather horrible, in
order to sufficiently impress His people.
Lou: But with all of these risks, why would God go ahead, recognizing that this could happen? Wasn’t there a better way?
Graham: Sometimes we wish the whole Bible would have been
written differently and been a littler clearer. I would say the All Wise
One used the very best approach possible, and there were always some
who did not misunderstand. Some have said, “If You’re the One who
sees the little sparrow fall, and You asked us to kill these animals, it must
have been necessary to impress us sufficiently.” And the sacrifices were
also a foretaste of the Innocent One who would come and die later on.
Lou: Related to the previous chapter on the emergency measures, a
questioner writes, “I was disappointed that you used Galatians 3:19–25
as referring to the Ten Commandments, whereas I think Paul was concerned about the doctrine of circumcision. The entire book of Galatians
was an endeavor to change the church’s view of the ‘ceremonial’ law.
See Acts 15 and so on. Isn’t it true that the sacrificial system is the
added law? Doesn’t Colossians 2:14–16 talk about a law that was to be
blotted out?”
Graham: One could readily come to that conclusion, but I think
one would pay a price in taking that view and not including all law. One
might be tempted to say that a legalist is a person who still follows the
ceremonial laws, as the Pharisees did, “There’s no way you could be
legalistic about the Ten Commandments.” Yet the most damaging legalism over the centuries has been with respect to the Ten. Certainly the
most damaging legalism has been with respect to the fourth of the Ten
Commandments. So I believe Paul’s point is about all law. All law was
an emergency measure to bring us back to faith and a right relationship
with God. That’s the point. So if you leave out the Ten in Galatians 3,
you are suggesting that there is no way you can be legalistic about the
Ten Commandments.
Lou: A few more questions. “If the universe was satisfied when
Christ died, then why are we still here?”
Graham: Ah, that’s a great question. We will answer that in detail
in Chapter Eighteen. “What is God Waiting For?” is a question we ought
to keep in mind throughout these conversations. Why did He wait so
long to send His Son? Why is He waiting so long to send Him back the
second time?
Lou: Here’s an intriguing question: “Would we lose our freedom if
God always rewarded the righteous? If righteousness always paid off,
why rebel?”
Graham: That might explain why God does what He does sometimes, as with Job in Scripture. It’s true. If every time I did what was
right God rewarded me, that would be quite a motivation, wouldn’t it?
Then I would do what I do because God has told me to, and He has the
power to reward and destroy, as in the first of the three reasons for obedience we talked about earlier in the chapter. That would produce a certain kind of obedience. But isn’t it far more impressive if, like Job, we’re
not rewarded right away and we love God anyway? God’s friend Job was
able to say, “Though God slay me, yet will I trust Him” (based on Job
13:15).
Lou: That reminds me of the third type of obedience you talked
about earlier. If God commands me to do something beyond my present
understanding, I can trust Him even when it appears that righteousness
is not rewarded.
Two questions: “What is the difference between killing and murdering? Is it because it damages yourself when you hate your brother?” And
another person says, “I am confused. ‘Thou shalt not kill’ is a commandment, and yet God told His people to kill.” Can you touch on these very
quickly?
Graham: In both Hebrew and Greek the sixth commandment
speaks of murder. “Thou shalt not murder.” Many modern versions are
so translated. What’s so bad about murdering is what happens inside. As
Jesus said, “He who hates his brother has already done the damage. He
is a murderer” (based on Matthew 5:21–24). On the other hand, God has
never said, “Go and murder people.” He did instruct His people to kill in
battle. But He didn’t want them to. It’s very clear. He said, “Let My
angel do it. Let Me put My children to sleep.” He never wanted them to
kill at all (see Exodus 23:23–30). That too was an emergency measure. But
at the end of the Millennium God doesn’t violate that law either. Do you
think He hates His children as they die? Of course not. He doesn’t even
kill them. He watches them die and He cries. God has never violated His
Ten Commandments. Never.
Lou: Our next chapter in this series of conversations will be number
thirteen, “How God Treats His Erring Children.”
Graham: For me, that topic is the most convincing evidence of all
that God is not arbitrary, exacting, vengeful and severe, and it is evidence in demonstration, not in words. It is about how He treats us when
we sin.
• • • • •
The Why of Obedience
1) Because God told me so and He has the power to reward or destroy.
2) Because God told me so and I love Him and want to please Him.
3) Because experience has shown me that what God wants is the right
and sensible thing to do. I want to do it even when I don’t fully understand.
• • • • •
