Chapter Three
All God Asks Is Trust
In the previous chapter we considered what went wrong in God’s universe. If we can understand what went wrong, we are in a better position to understand what it would take to set things right and keep them
right for eternity. We will also be better able to understand what we
need to do (if anything) in order to be set right, and enjoy the “rightness” of the universe once again.
It is apparent, from the biblical description of this controversy in
God’s family, that there was a breakdown of trust and trustworthiness
— even to the point of war in heaven (Revelation 12:7–12). That war
spilled down to this planet, where we experience continuing misunderstanding and distrust of God. It is not that we’ve all become irreligious,
but that we’ve allowed ourselves to be deceived by the adversary. Even
many who do worship God, worship a false picture of Him — with all
the hazards that follow. We tend to become like the kind of God we worship and admire.
• • • • •
Many who worship God, worship a false picture of Him—
with all the hazards that follow. We tend to become like the
kind of God we worship and admire.
• • • • •
There can be no real and lasting peace in the universe until trust
and trustworthiness have been restored. That’s the reason for the
title of this chapter, “All God Asks Is Trust.” All that God asks of
the loyal angels is trust. All that God asks of even damaged sinners is
trust. Because where there is mutual trust and trustworthiness, there
is perfect peace, perfect freedom, perfect security. All is right; all is
well.
What matters most is for us to trust God enough to be willing to
listen, to stand humbly in His presence and ask, “What must I do to be
saved? What must I do to be well? What must I do to be safe?” In the
beginning God created the entire universe. He is able and willing to heal
all of the damage done by sin. But there is no substitute for trust. All the
generous and gracious provisions of the plan of salvation are of no avail
if we don’t trust God enough to let Him do for us what He’s so eager to
do.
All God Asked of a Jailer in Philippi
I think this helps explain Paul’s very brief reply to the jailer in
Philippi. An earthquake brought down the doors of that jail (Acts
16:25–26). The jailer was afraid that the prisoners had escaped, in which
case he himself would have been executed. But when Paul called out to
him, he ran in and fell down at the feet of Paul and Silas (Acts 16:27–29).
He then brought them out of the jail and earnestly inquired, “What
must I do to be saved?” Paul did not reply, “If you have the time, I have
twenty lessons for you. As we sit here in the rubble of the jail, I’ll lead
you through the doctrines of the church.” No, all Paul said was: “Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ and you will be saved” (based on Acts 16:30–
31). So we need to clearly understand what Paul meant by that word
translated “believe.”
We often go to great lengths to explain the difference between
belief and faith. Of all the illustrations I’ve heard to explain the difference, the one that impressed me the most was the story of the man who
strung a cable over Niagara Falls. A preacher described how a crowd
watched the man crossing over the Falls on the cable, pushing a wheelbarrow in front of him. Upon his return, he turned to the crowd and
said, “Do you believe I can do that again?”
A man in the crowd replied, “Yes, I believe you can.”
“Then climb into my wheelbarrow.”
“Not on your life!” said the spectator.
The preacher telling the story would then say, “You see, he
believed he could make it across, but he didn’t have faith.”
The difference between belief and faith matters in the English language, but there is no such difference between belief and faith in the
Bible. There is only one word for both and that word is pistis. You see,
the original conversation between the jailer and Paul was in Greek. And
that’s the reason these Bible versions read differently.
Let’s look at Acts 16:30–31 in several versions. The first reading is
from the King James Version (KJV): “‘Sirs, what must I do to be saved?’
And they said, ‘Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be
saved.’” But in the New English Bible (NEB) it reads: “Put your trust
in the Lord Jesus. . . .” The Berkeley version has: “Have faith in the Lord
Jesus. . .” [emphases supplied]. All three translations are based on exactly
the same Greek word. In English the word pistis means belief, faith,
trust, confidence. And the versions vary, just for variety.
Among these options, we’re most familiar with the word “faith.”
As Christians we talk about it a great deal. But what is faith? What do
we mean when we say to a person, “Have faith,” or, “You should have
more faith,” or, “We’re saved by faith,” or, “righteousness by faith”?
Faith means so many different things these days that we almost need
another word. The most notorious definition of faith is the one given by
a small schoolboy. He said, “Faith is believin’ what you know ain’t so.”
You see, in some people’s minds, if you’re prepared to believe what “you
know ain’t so,” that’s real faith.
Now, most of us wouldn’t go that far. But we might say, “Faith is
believing something for which you have insufficient evidence,” because if
you had sufficient evidence, you wouldn’t say, “I accept that by faith,”
you would say, “I know.” Does that mean that the more we come to
know God, the less faith we’ll have? When we actually stand in His presence will we say, “God, I see You now, and that’s the end of my faith.
I’ll never believe in You again, because now I know You”?
What Is Faith Really?
Perhaps the famous verse in Hebrews 11:1 will help us. First, the
familiar wording of the King James (KJV): “Now faith is the substance
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.” Does it help to
know that faith is a substance? Or that faith is the evidence of things not
seen? That would suggest that if you have faith in something, that’s evidence that it is really so. But if you have faith that there’s a man in the
moon does that prove there must be one? That doesn’t make sense! But
do we sometimes use faith this way? Does Hebrews 11 encourage us to
do so? Let’s look at those two words, translated “substance” and “evidence.”
Let’s take the word for “evidence” first. The Greek word is elengchos. It’s a noun that comes from a verb used for the work of the Holy
Spirit. When the Spirit comes, He will convince you. He will convict
you. He will settle you into the truth. A better translation than “evidence” would be “conviction.” Faith is conviction.
Now let’s look at “substance.” The Greek word it is based on is
hupostasis. We get the English word hypostasis from that, although most
of us rarely use it. It doesn’t help much to know that faith is a hypostasis, does it? But does it help to think of faith as a substance either?
Actually, the Greek word hupostasis means “that which stands under,”
and that’s where the “sub” and the “stance” came from. The English
“substance” is from the Latin equivalent of hupostasis. That may be very
good Latin, but in this case it’s not very good English.
Not until the turn of the twentieth century did scholars discover
what this word really means. As archeologists were digging in the sands
of Egypt, looking for manuscripts primarily, they found some that were
title deeds to property, business agreements, covenants; and the title on
each of these documents was this very word, hupostasis. And it dawned
on them that in Hebrews 11 the apostle was saying that faith is an agreement, a covenant. Covenants are all about relationship, what people
need to do if they are to trust each other in business. God offers us many
things, but first He presents Himself. If we decide that we can trust
Him, that we would like to “do business” with Him, that trusting relationship is faith.
So how should we translate this word hupostasis? Let’s look at
three different translations: “Faith is the title-deed of things hoped for”
(Montgomery). “Faith means we are confident of what we hope for, convinced of what we do not see” (Moffatt). “Faith is being sure of what
we hope for and certain of what we do not see” (NIV) [emphases supplied]. Can you see the idea of conviction or certainty coming through?
That’s the meaning of faith. This is further clarified by the previous context of Hebrews 11:1:
Don’t throw away your trust now — it carries with it a rich
reward. Patient endurance is what you need if, after doing God’s will,
you are to receive what he has promised. For yet a little while, He that
cometh shall come, and shall not tarry. But my righteous one shall live
by faith; and if he shrink back, my soul hath no pleasure in him.
Surely we are not going to be men who cower back and are lost, but
men who maintain their faith for the salvation of their souls!
Hebrews 10:35–39, Phillips.
Faith is our conviction. It’s being certain about things that at the
moment we cannot see. There is a background to that verse in Hebrews:
Habakkuk chapters one and two. There Habakkuk says to God: “Why
don’t you do something?” Habakkuk 1:2–4. And God says: “I am doing
something. But you wouldn’t believe it if I told you” (Habakkuk 1:5).
And Habakkuk says: “I’m going to wait and see” (Habakkuk 2:1). And
God says: “If what I have predicted seems slow, wait for it; it will come.
My righteous one will live in trust” (Habakkuk 2:3–4). That famous
verse, “The just shall live by faith” (Habakkuk 2:4), is not discussing forgiveness or justification. The verse is saying that the one who is right
with God will trust Him and be willing to wait. That’s the kind of trust
and right relationship with God that really counts. And when we come
to Paul’s use of the same phrase in Romans 1 (verses 16–17 — Chapters
Eight and Sixteen of this book), we’ll want to remember that Habakkuk
is the background for it.
• • • • •
Like a physician, God stands ready to heal all the damage
done. But He will not force us to be well. If we don’t trust
Him enough to listen, to cooperate, and to let Him heal the
damage done, there’s no way He can heal us.
• • • • •
The angels had such trust, at least the loyal ones did. They also had
questions! But they said to God, “We trust You enough that we’re willing to wait,” and they waited all the way to Calvary for some of the
answers to their questions. They heard the promise to Adam and Eve
that God was going to do something, and they were willing to wait
because they trusted God. The Bible’s examples of faith as actively trusting God help us to understand “salvation by faith” and “righteousness by
faith.” Faith does not save us. God saves us. But God can only save those
who trust Him.
Like a physician, God stands ready to heal all the damage done. But
He will not force us to be well. If we don’t trust Him enough to listen,
to cooperate, and to let Him heal the damage done, there’s no way He
can heal us. Physicians cannot heal rebellious patients who stay away
because they think the doctor is a quack. Only when there is mutual
trust can healing really take place.
Is Trust Really Enough?
Doesn’t it seem too little, however, that God would only ask for
trust? Isn’t it also necessary to know Him? To love Him? To obey Him?
Don’t we need to repent? To be reborn? To be converted? To be justified? To be sanctified? Don’t we even need to be perfect? The list of
expectations gets so long it’s no wonder that it discourages many people
from really wanting to have a right relationship with God. But don’t be
scared by that list. Understood in the larger view of what went wrong
and what needs to be set right, every one of those items I have mentioned is an integral part of a single, transforming experience that is
made available to us all. It was never supposed to be so complicated, or
divided into so many different parts.
• • • • •
We’re not saved by faith. Faith does not save us, God saves
us. But God can only save those who trust Him.
• • • • •
Let’s take, for example, the expectation “to know God.” What’s
the difference between knowing God and trusting Him? A classic text
for this is John 17:3, RSV: “And this is eternal life, that they know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.” As we noted
in the previous chapter, to really know someone is to love, trust, and
admire them. To know God is to trust Him, to love Him and to admire
Him. That word is even used for the intimacy between a husband and
his wife. I can hear God saying, “If only My children really trusted Me.
If only they really knew Me. If only they really loved Me. If they were
only willing to listen, and let Me help them, I could perfectly heal all the
damage done. Everything would be right again. And we could keep it
right forever.” Now that’s the whole list, if you want to put it in simple
terms. Is there anything He couldn’t do for us if we honestly regarded
Him that way?
I often hear God saying in the Bible, “How I wish My children
could be My friends once again. And they could see Me as being their
friend. And then all would be well.” Now the Bible describes at least
one such friend of God, Moses:
The Lord would speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks
with his friend. . . . And the Lord said to Moses, “I will do the very
thing you have asked, because I am pleased with you and I know you
by name.” Exodus 33:11, 17, NIV.
What an honor to be listed in the Bible as God’s friend! And can you see
how being a friend is the same as being known? One trusts people who
are known and who have behaved in a trustworthy manner. So trust
includes being loved and all those other things.
Now surely trust in God, and friendship with God, is no “leap in
the dark,” as some people describe faith. It is not safe to trust someone
we do not know. So God doesn’t ask us to trust Him as a stranger. “So
faith [trust] comes from what is heard, and what is heard comes by the
preaching of Christ.” Romans 10:17, RSV. “Faith comes from what is
heard” because they didn’t have copies of the Bible the way we do. They
had to listen as the Scriptures were read. And as they listened they
heard the truth. They heard the evidence. And some were won to repentance and to trust, particularly when they heard the truth revealed by
the Son of God Himself.
David surely knew what God wanted of His children, so that peace
could be restored and everything be set right:
Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward being; therefore teach
me wisdom in my secret heart. . . . Create in me a clean heart, O God,
and put a new and right spirit within me. . . .For thou hast no delight
in sacrifice; were I to give a burnt offering, thou wouldst not be
pleased. The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit; a broken
and contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. Psalm 51:6, 10, 16–
17, RSV.
This is what God wants, in order to have peace once again in the family.
Because that means we are willing to stand humbly in the presence of our
God and ask, “What must I do to be well, to be saved?” And He says,
“You need a new heart and a right spirit.” And then we say, “I’d be very
happy to have one. Please give me one soon.”
Hosea understood what God wanted, to have peace in the universe
again: “It is true love that I have wanted, not sacrifice; the knowledge of
God rather than burnt offerings.” Hosea 6:6, Phillips. In Hebrew parallelism, the second line of the sentence simply reaffirms or enlarges the
point in the first line. The parallelism in verse 6 shows that true knowledge of God and love for God mean the same thing. That’s what God
wants. Hosea goes on: “But they, like Adam have broken their agreement; again and again they have played me false.” Hosea 6:7, Phillips.
They cheated. How much security can you have in the family when some
of the children are playing false?
Jesus told Nicodemus what had to happen before he would be safe
to save: “Jesus answered him, ‘Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is
born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God.’” John 3:3, RSV. “Born
again” means a new heart and a right spirit, exactly what David was say-
ing in the fifty-first Psalm. Jesus didn’t say ,“Unless you are forgiven,”
or, “Unless you are justified” (have your legal standing adjusted), you
cannot enter the kingdom. He said, “Unless you are changed and become
a trustworthy person, a teachable member of My family, you will not be
safe to admit into the hereafter.”
How can anyone tell they have really been reborn, and have genuine trust and faith? How can anyone know they have been put right
with God and all is well? This is a question which was much debated in
the early days, and is still debated to this day. In fact, a leader in the early
Christian church wrote an entire book to clear it up, a book that has
troubled many saints; it’s in the Bible, the book of James:
My brothers, what use is it for a man to say he has faith when
he does nothing to show it? Can that faith save him? . . . You have
faith enough to believe that there is one God. Excellent! The devils have
faith like that, and it makes them tremble. James 2:14, 19, NEB.
The devils believe God is powerful but there is no friendship
between them and God.
Was it not by his action, in offering his son Isaac upon the altar,
that our father Abraham was justified? Surely you can see that faith
was at work in his actions, and that by these actions the integrity of
his faith was fully proved. Here was fulfillment of the words of
Scripture: “Abraham put his faith in God, and that faith was counted to him as righteousness.” James 2:21–23, NEB.
According to James, false faith is useless, but a genuine faith is
demonstrated by one’s actions. Then in the following verse is the puzzling word “counted.” If you take the legal view of what’s gone wrong
in the universe, you can hear the cash registers ringing as you read this
verse. But the word “counted” has another meaning besides its use in
accounting or math: It can mean “considered,” or “reckoned as.”
Reading it this way God was saying, “Abraham trusts Me, and that’s
good. That’s what I want. That’s what it means to be right.” Evidence
that this is the correct reading is found at the end of the verse:
“Elsewhere he is called ‘God’s friend’” (James 2:23, NEB). When you are
God’s friend all is right, all is well.
How Much Trust Do I Need?
Now how much “faith” do we have to have? Must we trust completely, or even perfectly, to be right with God? Couldn’t we get away
with a little unfaithfulness now and then? Have you husbands ever said,
“Wife, how much could I cheat on you and this marriage still survive?”
Would that make any sense? What if a friend should say to you, “How
much could I lie to you or hide the truth — and this friendship still last?”
Frankly, that would make no sense at all.
Does God need to leave a little room for unfaithfulness in our relationship? Is a “perfect relationship” asking too much of us? Does it make
sense to even ask the question? When we “cheat” on God, and cheat we
have, God remains our constant friend. But we may be destroying our
side of the friendship. You see, if what God wants is friendship, a loving,
trusting relationship; then what He wants is obviously not a requirement
demanded, but an absolutely voluntary experience.
This long debate regarding faith, works and obedience has troubled
saints through the years, but it could be so readily resolved if we looked
at the biblical word for obedience, which is hupakoē (four syllables, one
for each vowel). The first part, “hup,” means “under.” And the second
part, “akoē” (three syllables), means “hearing.” The Greek word literally
means “listening under.” It describes a humble willingness to listen. If
we truly love and trust God, we’ll be willing to listen. It wouldn’t make
sense for us not to listen to One we love, trust and admire.
Now could God’s expectation of our willingness to listen be one
hundred percent? Our performance may be weak. We may stumble as we
leave our doctor’s office. But a willingness to listen? Is that demanding
too much of us? Is it too much to say, “Don’t cheat there. Let that be one
hundred percent!” Is it expecting too much of us to ask that we be completely committed to listening humbly to our Friend?
If it should seem that God is too demanding in asking for such a relationship, that He expects too much of us, it surely is encouraging to read
about the heroes and heroines of faith celebrated in the same chapter of
the same book that tells us what faith is. Look how Hebrews 11 uses the
stories of the Old Testament as illustrations of what faith is, and what it
is not:
By faith the prostitute Rahab escaped the doom of the unbelievers, because she had given the spies a kindly welcome. Need I say more?
Time is too short for me to tell the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson,
Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets. . . . These also, one
and all, are commemorated for their faith. Hebrews 11:31–32, 39,
NEB.
Was Rahab’s life in perfect harmony with God’s will at the time
she welcomed the spies (Joshua 2:1–14)? Was Gideon’s trust in God perfect when the angel came to him (Judges 6:36–40) ? Was Samson’s life an
ideal you would teach to your children (Judges 13–16)? Was David’s life
a model of Christian perfection? Yet Hebrews 11:39 (NEB) sums up:
“These also, one and all, are commemorated for their faith”. Is God too
demanding? With all their faults and sins, God holds these people out to
us as models of being willing to listen. They were far from perfect, but
evidently, at least at some point in their lives, they loved God and trusted He would heal the damage done. And God puts them in Hebrews 11
for our encouragement.
Surely no Bible story is more encouraging than the story of the
thief on the cross. What did he do that caused Jesus to respond with
those wonderful words in Luke? “And he said, ‘Jesus, remember me
when you come in your kingly power.’ And he said to him . . . ‘you will
be with me in Paradise.’” Luke 23:42–43, RSV. Jesus was hanging on
the cross between two thieves (the Greek word tells us they were not
just burglars, but violent criminals) who were cursing and swearing, and
also mocking Jesus along with the crowds.
Then something happened to one of these thieves. He listened to
Jesus say, “John, please look after Mother when I’m gone” (John 19:25–
27). Perhaps the thief thought of his own mother, and that really
touched him. He had heard Jesus saying, “Father, forgive them” (Luke
23:34). Then he learned from the placard above Jesus’ head that the one
saying “Father forgive them” was “the King of the Jews” (Luke 23:38).
So the thief thought to himself, “If Jesus really has a kingdom, and rules
over it with forgiveness, that’s just the kind of kingdom someone like me
needs. I’m a thief. I need to be forgiven. I wouldn’t be safe in any other
kingdom than a kingdom where the king says, ‘I forgive you. I forgive
you.’”
So he turned to Jesus and said, “Jesus, if that’s the kind of kingdom
You’re going to reign over, I’d like to live in it. Please, could You remember me?” I suspect he was a little tentative in saying that. He didn’t
know how Jesus was going to respond. But then he heard the words that
confirmed his trust. “Yes, I’d be pleased to remember you.” And then
the thief died, with his tithe unpaid, and probably all kinds of unclean
things in his stomach. He never made restitution to anyone for his
crimes. He was never baptized. He never kept a Sabbath. But he’ll be in
the Kingdom! The next moment of consciousness after his death will be
in the resurrection, and he will come face to face with that same Person
in the middle. Jesus will say to him, “You have a lot to learn.” And the
thief will say, “If You say so, that’s all right with me.”
If anything should happen to any of us tonight, I would hope that
we would die God’s trusting friend. Because if we do, we will arise in
the next moment of consciousness face to face with God. And we will
not be afraid, because we will know the truth about God. We will trust
Him, know Him, love Him, and all those other things. We will have been
set right. And if He should say to us, “You know, there’s a great deal for
you to learn,” we would say in response, “I’d be pleased to listen,
because I trust and admire You. I want to be Your friend.”
• • • • •
Faith implies an attitude toward God of love, trust, and
deepest admiration. Anyone who has such faith would be
perfectly safe to save. This is why faith is the only requirement for heaven, and for salvation.
• • • • •
You see, faith is just a word we use to describe a relationship with
God as with a person well -known. The better He is known the better
this relationship may be. Faith implies an attitude toward God of love,
trust, and deepest admiration. It means having enough confidence in God
— based on the more than adequate evidence revealed — to be willing to
believe what He says, to accept what He offers, and to do what He wishes — without reservation — for the rest of eternity. Anyone who has
such faith would be perfectly safe to save. This is why faith is the only
requirement for heaven, and for salvation.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: You have said a great deal about trust in this chapter. I can hear a person saying something like this, “When are we going
to get on to the really important things, like justification and sanctification, expiation, propitiation, atonement, substitution, and so forth.
Haven’t we spent long enough on trust?”
Graham Maxwell: I think we have been talking about justification,
but we’ve given it another name. We’ll even use those familiar names
along the way, because they are an important part of our history. And
when we talk to our friends for whom those are the words, then we
should use them if we are going to communicate at all. But I’d rather use
the words the Bible uses. And some might respond, “Well, aren’t those
the words the Bible uses?” No, it’s going to be interesting to arrive in
the Kingdom and settle all debates about Paul by going up to him and
saying, “Give us the last word, Paul. What did you mean by justification?”
He’ll say, “Could I hear that one more time?”
“Justification. You know, your favorite word.”
“You think so? Actually, I never used it.”
“How about sanctification?”
“No.”
“Propitiation?”
“Not that one either.”
“You mean you used none of those terms? What about expiation?”
Paul never used one of them. Neither did Jesus or anybody else in
the Bible. You see, many of our favorite theological words are actually
Latin and Greek terms that came from a period when Latin and Greek
were the main languages used for theology. Take Sola Scriptura, for
example. That’s pure Latin, meaning “the Bible only.” Or think of the
word I used in a previous chapter, the Christomonistic principle. That’s
based on the Greek. Christos (Christ) and monos (only). Very few people
study Latin and Greek these days. So why do we keep using these
words? Why not simply say “the Bible only” or “Christ alone”? I would
much rather use plain and simple terms to describe these things, but each
of these terms has a history and it is good to mention them, so we can
see where they fit into the larger picture. But we should keep in mind
that Jesus described the whole truth about His Father and how we can
be saved without ever using one of those words. Jesus spoke Aramaic,
rather than Latin or Greek.
Lou: I wonder if the words become a sort of scholarly shorthand?
But the danger of that is we think we understand what we are talking
about when we may have loaded the word with meaning that really isn’t
fair to Scripture.
Graham: That’s certainly the hazard. So it’s good to go back to
how these things were described in the beginning, and we’ll try to do
that in a later chapter.
Lou: All right. Let’s move along to another question. “You’ve
talked about faith meaning trust rather than just ‘knowing’ something.
Aren’t there some things that we could legitimately say we only know
by faith, such as that statement in Hebrews, ‘by faith we know that the
world was made’” (Hebrews 11:3)?
Graham: I would want to reply, “By faith in what? What do you
mean when you say you know something by faith? Do you have a feeling
of conviction inside perhaps?” Where Hebrews says “we know by faith,”
what would the writer mean? Faith in something, to be sure.
How do we know anything about where the world came from? We
have to read it in the Scriptures, don’t we? So we read the record. By
faith in the Scriptures we believe that God created the world as recorded. But that leads us to another question. Can the Bible itself be trusted?
When we say we know these things by faith and they are things
described in Scripture, we are not saying, “I know this because I have a
warm feeling down in my heart.” That warm feeling could come from
indigestion! So when you say, “I know something by faith,” I would
want to know what you are having faith in, and in Hebrews 11 it is faith
in the Bible. We will cover this question in some depth in Chapter Five,
“The Record of the Evidence.” Can the Bible really be trusted? Can you
say in the most critical company, “I have found the Bible to be utterly
reliable from cover to cover”? I believe you can, and I’ll lay that out in
Chapter Five.
Lou: What do you say to a person who says, “Look, I just want to
take the Bible as it reads! I read in the Bible that ‘God’s ways are
inscrutable. How can anyone know the mind of God?’ Romans 11:33.
Now why can’t I just accept that statement and say, ‘Why have conversations about God? How can we even know God? I’ll just believe the
Bible.’”
Graham: Depending on the person who is saying this, one might
reply differently. Let’s assume this is a very devout person who really
accepts the Scriptures. I would want to make the most of that. I would
say, “Well, what about these other places in the Bible? Do you accept
those too? Or do you just accept this one?”
Lou: What other places?
Graham: Places like Romans 1 (verses 19–20) that say God can be
known. In fact, this individual is accepting one verse in Romans and
skipping others. If that doesn’t work, then I might turn to a place that
says, “Give wine to the poor, that they may forget their misery” (based
on Proverbs 31:6–7), and verses like that. Hopefully this individual will
realize that you can’t simply “take the Bible as it reads.” Maxims like
“here a little and there a little” (often taken out of context from Isaiah
28:9–13) are not sufficient for accurate understanding of the Bible.
When you say that you accept the Bible, you need to accept it all
the way through. And probably that’s what the questioner meant in saying, “I accept God’s word — if it says it, I believe it.” Then I would
want to point to these other verses that say that God can be known.
After all, if He can’t be known, why do we have all this content about
Him in Scripture? Why did Christ come to make His Father known?
The use or misuse of one little verse can lead us down all kinds of pathways I’m sure the questioner wouldn’t want to go.
Lou: So you are saying that the basic attitude of “I want to accept
the Bible as it reads,” is a good attitude provided it takes into account
the Bible as a whole, all sixty-six books, the total message of Scripture.
Graham: Right.
Lou: James 2 (verses 21–22) makes reference to how Abraham’s sacrifice of Isaac demonstrates that he was a “man of faith.” Couldn’t you
call it “blind faith” when Abraham set out to obey God’s request for
him to “take your son and offer him as a sacrifice”? Genesis 22:1–3.
Graham: Remember Abraham’s relationship with God. They were
two of the best friends in all of history! Abraham knew God well. He
had had a long experience with God. When God had asked him to do
things before, it had always worked out well and it made sense in the
end. So on Mount Moriah there was no blind faith on Abraham’s part.
God asked him to do something that puzzled him a great deal. At the
moment he couldn’t understand. But he said, “God, if it is You saying it
(and I know You so well) I know that this will make sense at some point
and You will provide some kind of solution, so I’m on my way.”
This is the kind of faith that says, “God, I’m on my way, but may I
ask You why?” And as Abraham thought it through, he said to himself,
“The One who gave me this son miraculously is able to resurrect him as
well (Hebrews 11:19). Or maybe He will provide a substitute at the last
minute (Genesis 22:8).” So instead of the sacrifice of Isaac being blind
faith, I would say he knew God well enough to go, and to know that God
would provide a solution that made sense.
Lou: But there was in that experience an element of uncertainty
and pain. Would all this work out in the end? How would it all work
out?
Graham: Abraham certainly wondered and questioned. Faith can
include that kind of thing. And when we have found God to be trustworthy in the past, we are willing to obey Him when He asks us to do
something beyond our present understanding.
Lou: I want to come back to James 2 again. James seems to be saying
that faith alone is not enough. Does that mean that we also have to have
works? And isn’t that getting back on dangerous ground?
Graham: I guess it depends on what we mean by “works.”
Remember that the word for obedience means “a willingness to listen.”
God does not expect perfect performance. Suppose I have just gone to
my physician with an advanced case of arthritis, will he ask me to run the
four-minute mile on the way home? Of course not! Instead, he helps me
down the steps into my wheelchair. He says, “Walk a little further this
week, take your medication, and be sure to come back.” What the doctor
is really asking of me is “a willingness to listen and cooperate.”
I think to picture God as our Physician is the best model we could
have. As with the physician, the performance God really desires of us is
the willingness to listen. I might die the next day, but I’m going to die
His trusting patient. And at the resurrection I will arise His trusting
patient and all will be well. He knows we are too weak to perform perfectly. He wants us someday to be perfect; not just spiritually, but physically, mentally, socially, all those things. But He knows it is going to
take a little time. What He wants right now is a sincere willingness to
listen, without reservation. Then the healing is guaranteed. God has the
ability to perfectly restore every one of His children. He has never lost a
patient, except the patients who are unwilling to listen. But when we are
willing to listen, our behavior becomes more and more like God.
Lou: I hear you saying that James gives us a picture of what happens in our lives when we are truly willing to listen. But here’s another
question. Trust sounds like something we have to do. But according to
the Bible, doesn’t God do it all? Isn’t faith itself a gift from God?
Graham: It is certainly described in that way in the Bible. “Faith is
a gift of God” (Ephesians 2:8, see also Romans 12:3). This is so important
that it is a large part of the next chapter in this book: “God’s Way of
Restoring Trust.” In fact, God gives us nearly everything, I believe. He
gives us life. He gives us minds to weigh the evidence. He gives us the
evidence. He gives us the freedom. He gives us everything except one
important piece, He does not cast the vote. If in this great war, God
were to manipulate us so we would vote the way He wanted, Satan
would cry foul.
God does not win this great controversy by “stuffing the ballot
box” through the gift of faith. If faith is the decisive thing, you have the
question, “Why does He put faith in some and not others?” If faith is
the decisive thing, there’s no responsibility. A person could say, “I
don’t have faith. You know why? God didn’t give me any.” But the decisive thing is that God gives us everything, but He doesn’t cast the vote.
That’s up to us. That is what freedom is. That’s where responsibility is.
And I like it this way. It’s a little scary, but would you want it any
other way? As I mentioned, we’ll go a little deeper into these things in
the next couple of chapters.
Lou: The question has come up, Graham, how do you decide what
translations to use? Are you just picking out the one that says it the way
that you want it?
Graham: That’s a very fair question. I have more than a hundred
and fifty different English translations and when I prepare a presentation
like this, I have versions all over the table and the floor. It’s true that I
am looking for what I want, but what do I want? I always begin with
the original. I have taught biblical languages for years: Hebrew, Greek,
and Aramaic. What I want is a version that will be as neutral as possible.
In the previous chapter, for example, I mentioned Romans 8:3.
Some versions translate it, “God sent His Son as a sacrifice for sin,” or
“to atone for sin.” Those are very interpretive. The Greek of Romans 8:3
just says: “He sent His Son concerning sin.” So I chose two versions that
expressed the original idea in a neutral way. One was: “He sent His Son
to deal with sin.” That’s beautifully neutral. It lets the reader decide
how He dealt with it. The other version said: “He sent His Son to do
away with sin.” If I can’t find a translation that is truly neutral, I use
several to show the various possible meanings. In the chapter where we
discuss the Bible (Chapter Five: “The Record of the Evidence”), we’ll
go into that in more detail.
Lou: All right. But what if I only have one? You say you have a
hundred and fifty. I have maybe twenty or thirty, and I don’t think my
wife is going to let me buy enough to catch up with you.
Graham: Unless your one translation is one of the really extraordinary ones, like the New Testament Revised by the Spirits, or the New
Testament Translated From Numerology, you should be OK. Any of the
mainline versions are very trustworthy, if you read the Bible as a whole.
If you make everything depend on a single verse, on the other hand,
what if the comma is in the wrong place? It is safer to put many passages
together. But the safest approach of all is in reading the Bible as a
whole. When you approach things that way, almost every version is
dependable.
Lou: Here’s a question that can be related to the earlier chapters of
this book. What did Jesus mean when He told Nicodemus, “You must be
born again” (John 3:4, 9)? A lot of people say things like, “I’m a bornagain Christian.” What does that mean?
Graham: Nicodemus himself even asked what it meant. Notice that
Jesus did not say “you must be forgiven” or “you must be justified” or
you cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. Rather “born again” is more
like what David said in the fifty-first Psalm. “Born again” means having a
new heart and a new spirit (Psalm 51:10), to be changed from a rebel to
someone who can be trusted, to be changed from a stubborn person (who
is unwilling to listen) to someone who loves, trusts, and admires God. To
experience all of these is like being born all over again. And that’s why
Jesus used such a dramatic picture.
That’s also the meaning of being converted. You turn around
and go the other way like you sometimes do driving a car. It is a change
from being stubborn and rebellious to someone who is humbly willing to
listen, love, trust, and admire. Someone who does not want to miss a single word of what God may be saying. One way to describe this kind of
change is “being born again.” I think that Jesus was chiding Nicodemus
for being a little slow to pick up on something that he should have known
very well.
Lou: Another individual has written this question: “Do you see the
world as a predominantly evil place? If so, how can God’s plan be vindicated, if evil seems to triumph over good?” And this individual adds, “I
believe that good must triumph over evil without divine intervention
before Christ can come again.”
Graham: The most important words in this question would be
“without divine intervention.” If the person who wrote this means it in
the absolute sense, it would leave us in a helpless situation. In this conflict we have an adversary who is intervening all he can, manipulating,
deceiving and beclouding the intellect. If God had never intervened, we
would be in trouble.
But if the questioner wants to say that truth will triumph without
God ever manipulating things, I would agree, absolutely. My understanding is that God intervenes in order that truth may be seen clearly,
so that truth may have a chance to win. God will not win because He has
intervened with power and force and manipulation. That’s the Devil’s
method. God will win, in a certain sense, without intervention. But He
is very much involved in this world in order to protect us from the
adversary and give the truth a chance to be seen. God will win because
the truth is seen to be true, and we’ll agree.
Lou: Moving in a different direction. “If it is true that the plan of
salvation and the death of Christ was needed to confirm the faith of the
unfallen angels, would it not seem that God needed a place like this earth
to send His Son to die in order to answer Satan’s charges?”
• • • • •
God will not win because He has intervened with power and
force and manipulation. That’s the Devil’s method.
• • • • •
Graham: Must a parent die under the wheels of a truck, pushing
his little child out of the way, to prove that he or she loves the child ?
That is one way such love would be demonstrated, but it doesn’t have
to be that way. God doesn’t need the emergency on this earth to show
that He loves His children and is worthy of their trust. But when the
emergency arose, look how He behaved. Look at the way He has handled
it. God is no more trustworthy after the cross than before. But because
of the emergency, God is more clearly seen to be trustworthy than He
was before. He has taken advantage of an emergency, and I find it very
gracious of Him.
Lou: Although the emergency made His heart break, He made
something positive out of it.
Graham: Yes, that’s right.
Lou: Here’s a question related to Martin Luther and his problems
with Hebrews, James, Jude and Revelation mentioned in a previous
chapter. Could you give us some actual references where people could go
for themselves? People believe what you said because they trust you, but
they would like to have a reference.
Graham: That’s fair enough. The prefaces that I read from can be
found in a series edited by Jaroslav Pelikan, entitled Luther’s Works. In
Volume 35 Luther says there is no way the Holy Spirit could have
inspired the book of Revelation. I’ve also mentioned that Luther
thought the book of James was totally contrary to Saint Paul. But lest
we put Luther in an unfair light, you should read the prefaces for your-
self. There he also spoke so reverently of Scripture. He says, for example,
“I praise [the epistle of James] and consider it a good book, because it sets
up no doctrine of men but vigorously promulgates the law of God.” That
statement is needed to balance out the other. The only reason I brought
it up was to answer the question whether he was able to see the larger,
great controversy view. And there are even glimpses of that.
In the first volume of Luther’s Works, the one on Genesis, he says,
“The holy fathers have fancied that there once was this war up in
Heaven.” He said, “That is a likely idea. It fits in with the statement in
Jude that angels fell.” And in another place he said, “You know, it is true
that the angels apparently were once able to sin, because some of them
fell.” Then he went on to say, “The loyal angels were confirmed, so that
they are no longer capable of sinning.” From this evidence it seems to me
that he was working with it up to a point, but he never truly followed
it through.
Lou: Where will we be going with the next chapter? What is the
topic?
Graham: Chapter Four is entitled “God’s Way of Restoring
Trust.” God does not seek to restore trust simply by making claims or
through spectacular shows of power. Instead He invites our trust on the
basis of evidence. And I believe the methods that He has chosen to use
are the greatest reasons for trusting Him. That will be the key focus of
the next chapter.
