Chapter One
The Conflict In God’s Family
Our heavenly Father is so incredibly gracious, even toward those of us
who have misbehaved. But the Bible describes an amazing reality. Long,
long ago, even in the presence of perfect love and freedom, conflict broke
out in God’s family. There was war in heaven. The most vivid description of this war is presented in the last of the sixty-six books of the Bible,
the book of Revelation:
Then war broke out in heaven. Michael and his angels fought
against the dragon, who fought back with his angels; but the dragon
was defeated, and he and his angels were not allowed to stay in heaven
any longer. The huge dragon was thrown out! He is that old serpent,
named the Devil, or Satan, that deceived the whole world. He was
thrown down to earth, and all his angels with him.
Then I heard a loud voice in heaven saying: “Now God’s salvation has come! Now God has shown his power as King! Now his
Messiah has shown his authority! For the accuser of our brothers, who
stood before God accusing them day and night, has been thrown out
of heaven. Our brothers won the victory over him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the truth which they proclaimed; and they were willing
to give up their lives and die. And so rejoice, you heavens, and all you
who live there! But how terrible for the earth and the sea! For the
Devil has come down to you, and he is filled with rage, for he knows
that he has only a little time left.” Revelation 12:7–12, GNT.
As we read these words, it’s good to know that before there was
war, there was peace throughout the whole universe. There was peace
because all the members of God’s vast family trusted each other, and all
of them trusted their heavenly Father. The Father in turn could safely
trust in them. Where there is such mutual trust and trustworthiness,
there is perfect freedom. Perfect peace. Perfect security. And that’s the
way it’s going to be in the hereafter. The Bible never talks about prisons
in eternity. There will be no police on every corner. And women will be
safe walking the streets alone at any hour.
How the prophets must have enjoyed describing the peace, security, and freedom of the hereafter! Isaiah, for example, says there will be
wolves, leopards, and lions mixed in with the farm animals. And little
children will lead them (Isaiah 11:6–9). While there may be lions in heaven, there will be no reason to be afraid. Zechariah says that in the city to
come, elderly men and women will sit in the streets with staff in hand,
while boys and girls play safely there (Zechariah 8:4–5). But not yet.
The Origin of the Adversary (Satan)
Looking far into the past when there once was peace, a crisis of distrust broke out in God’s family. Sin in its essence is a breach, a breakdown of trust (Romans 14:23). And thus sin entered our universe for the
first time. We all know the story if we’ve ever read the Bible through. It
begins with the most brilliant of all God’s creatures. He is pictured in
Ezekiel 28 as standing in the very presence of God. He is pictured in
Isaiah 14 as knowing God so well that he went forth from the presence
of God bearing light and truth to his fellow angels. That is why he was
given the name Lucifer (Isaiah 14:12, KJV), which is a Latin term for
“bearer of light” or teacher of truth. A Greek version of the same name
is applied to Jesus Christ Himself in Revelation (22:16 — “morning star,”
see also John 1:4–5). So Lucifer had a Jesus-like role among the angels
before sin.
Moved by jealousy and pride, this brilliant, most trusted, even
revered, angel set out to undermine trust in God by circulating misinformation and lies about our heavenly Father. And thus he became, not a
bearer of light and a teacher of truth, but a bearer of lies (John 8:44). The
name Lucifer no longer applies to him. He no longer bears light; he is now
the bearer of lies. His real name is Satan, the opponent, the adversary,
the slanderer (Zechariah 3:1–2).
And how this adversary worked among the angels! In a pious manner he insinuated that God Himself was an untrustworthy liar.
Specifically, he charged that God did not respect the freedom of His children; He was arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe
(based on Genesis 3:1–5). With carefully chosen words he hoped to turn
his fellow angels away from God and win them to worship him instead.
It seems unbelievable that a creature could presume to think of himself as
God and suggest that angels worship him. But the Bible records that
Satan (Lucifer) is actually capable of such insanity:
How you are fallen from heaven, O Day Star [Lucifer in the
KJV], son of Dawn! How you are cut down to the ground, you who
laid the nations low! You said in your heart, “I will ascend to heaven;
above the stars of God I will set my throne on high; I will sit on the
mount of assembly in the far north; I will ascend above the heights of
the clouds, I will make myself like the Most High.” Isaiah 14:12–14,
RSV.
Later on Satan even asked his creator to get down on His knees in
the wilderness of temptation and worship His own creature:
Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain, and showed
him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them; and he said
to him, “All these I will give you, if you will fall down and worship
me.” Then Jesus said to him, “Begone, Satan! for [sic] it is written,
‘You shall worship the Lord your God and him only shall you serve.’”
Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and ministered to
him. Matthew 4:8–11, RSV.
The angels watched that whole experience. They must have been
stunned to see one of their fellow angels, a created being, asking God to
get down on His knees and worship.
God bore long and patiently as He watched this insurrection developing in His family. He watched until one-third of His brilliant, intelligent angels agreed with Satan that God was not worthy of their trust.
This means that even God, though infinite in power, could not persuade
one-third of the brilliant angels that Satan’s charges were false. Finally,
as we saw in Revelation 12, war broke out in heaven.
Satan not only shared these false charges (that God is an untrustworthy liar) with the angels, he wasted no time passing them on to our
first parents in the garden, thus involving us in the conflict as well:
Now the serpent was more subtle than any other wild creature
that the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, “Did God say,
‘You shall not eat of any tree of the garden’?” And the woman said
to the serpent, “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden, but
God said, ‘You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree which is in the
midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.’” But the
serpent said to the woman, “You will not die. For God knows that
when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God,
knowing good and evil.” Genesis 3:1–5, RSV.
The word “subtle” in this text means the serpent was more cunning or
crafty than any other creature God made. I don’t blame Eve for wanting
to be like God; isn’t that your prayer as well? But here the serpent
(Satan) deceived her into thinking there was a miraculous shortcut to
becoming like God.
Our Role in This Conflict
So whether we want to be or not, all of us are now caught up in
the consequences of this war. Everyone in the universe is unavoidably
involved. And the future of God’s family, to which we all belong,
depends upon the outcome of this war. Compared with God’s solution
of this problem, our own personal salvation, while important, is relatively inconsequential. For if God does not win this war, who would want
to be saved?
For God to win this war, however, does not leave out our salvation.
The way God has worked to win you and me is the same as the way in
which He won the war among the angels. In other words, the methods
that God has used to win us back to repentance and faith (trust) are the
same methods that have led the unfallen universe to tell Him He’s
absolutely trustworthy. Even if He should fail to win you and me, they
will trust and worship Him for the rest of eternity because of the demonstration of His goodness and trustworthiness.
So as much as God wants to save all of us, He could fail to do this
and still not lose the war. For in heavenly places the war was already
won two thousand years ago. All through the book of Revelation, angels
are celebrating God’s victory in the war. They never cease telling Him
that He’s proved Himself to be righteous and holy and just and good and
infinitely worthy of their trust (Revelation 5:9–12, 15:3–4). And that victory is the foundation of our salvation.
The early Christians sorely needed Revelation’s encouraging picture of the angels celebrating because there were several serious crises
among them at that time. For one thing, the Second Coming seemed to
be indefinitely delayed. They thought He would come around 50 A.D.,
and Paul had to tell them, “No, not yet” (2 Thessalonians 2:1–3). There
were still more things to happen (2 Thessalonians 2:4–12). But by the 90s
Jesus had still not returned. And besides this, there were heresies in the
church. Some, for example, were teaching that Christ had not really
come in human form. He had not really suffered and died. He had faked
it all. For that reason, they were sometimes called the Docetists (from the
Greek word for “seeming to be”). And then there was great opposition
and serious persecution. Not only that, the apostles were all dead, except
one. And he was the elderly John, now a prisoner on the island of Patmos
(Revelation 1:9). What good news was there to encourage the early
Christians?
You can count on God, when things are that bleak, to send a message of encouragement and explanation to His people. He surely
wouldn’t send a book of mysteries and dates and schedules of events that
they could not possibly understand. Rather, the sixty-sixth Bible book
that God did send is titled “Revelation,” or “Clarity.” The book of
Revelation is an invitation to discouraged early Christians to look a little
higher, to take the larger view of things. It helped them see how they’d
all been caught up in a vast conflict that affects the whole universe! And
that it’s a conflict over God’s own character and government.
Not only that, as you read through the book of Revelation you see
that God has already won this war, and the angels in heaven all agree
with Him. This is the good news. Revelation also invites us to join in the
celebration and then to go out to the world and invite all, who are willing to listen, to join in God’s victory in the war. When Christians discover this bigger picture, they don’t need to be on the defensive all the
time; they have good news to tell. There is no way God and His side can
lose. The invitation of the Bible’s sixty-sixth book is to join the winning side.
The book of Revelation also says that you can count on God to wait
until this truth about Him, this good news about His character and government, has been spread all over the world. God is the kind of person
who will wait until His children have had an opportunity to understand
the issues in the war. He wants them to be ready for the awesome events
the Bible describes as taking place before Jesus’ return. The highest privilege of God’s friends on this planet today is to understand and to present the plan of salvation in the larger setting of the Great Controversy.
Summing up, the first step in the journey of faith is to recognize that
we are sinners and that we need to be saved. It is understandable, there-
fore, that we might, at first, be preoccupied with what God has done in
order that we might be saved. But as we grow in the journey of faith, and
our knowledge of the Bible deepens, we learn to take the Bible as a
whole. It then becomes apparent that our own personal salvation (important as that is) is only a small part of a far larger picture that involves the
peace and security of the whole vast universe. It involves the confirmation of the truth about our God Himself.
The Larger View of the Bible
Having said this, it is important to recognize that not all
Christians have understood God’s plan of salvation in this larger view.
Even the great theologians of the Reformation did not see things in
this way. Luther, for example, was preoccupied with God’s gracious
provisions to save you and me. One reason Luther does not emphasize
the bigger picture is that he was unable to make much use of the book
of Revelation. Luther correctly insisted that we should use “the Bible
and the Bible only” (Sola Scriptura), but he himself was not able to use
all sixty-six books. He particularly regarded Hebrews, James, Jude,
and Revelation as inferior to the other books in the New Testament.
In the book of Revelation he said he found “too little about Christ,
and too much no one could understand.” And then he summarized,
“There’s no way the Holy Spirit could have inspired this book!” But
as a result of not being able to use the book of Revelation, his understanding of the gospel did not include the war in heaven.
• • • • •
When a person has been falsely accused, it is only by the
demonstration of trustworthiness over a long period of time,
and under a great variety of circumstances, especially difficult ones, that trust can be re-established and confirmed.
• • • • •
Some of us though, have been greatly helped by Luther in placing
the Bible as the highest of all authorities. We have done what Luther recommended and we’ve studied the Bible seriously, not just sixty-two
books or fewer, but all sixty-six. We have learned to read the Bible as a
whole and relate all its parts to the one central theme, the revelation of
the truth about God in the Great Controversy. I have had the privilege
of leading groups through all sixty-six Bible books more than a hundred
times. Every time I do this, it becomes even clearer to me that the Bible
is an inspired record of how God handled the crisis in His family. I think
if Luther were alive today, he too might rejoice in this bigger picture.
There are no shortcuts to trust, or the Bible would be a much
briefer book. Claims prove nothing. Even when a person has been falsely
accused of being untrustworthy, it is only by the demonstration of
trustworthiness over a long period of time, and under a great variety of circumstances, especially difficult ones, that trust can be reestablished and confirmed.
The Larger View of the Cross
The Bible records just such a demonstration, beginning with the
entrance of sin into the universe and climaxing with the death of Christ
on the cross. My understanding is that Christ died to reestablish peace
in God’s family. The apostle Paul explained the purpose of the cross, and
why Jesus had to die, in a number of passages. Look at Colossians, for
example:
For in him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell, and
through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in
heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross. Colossians 1:19–20,
RSV.
The word “reconcile” here means to atone, to bring to unity. Note
also where peace is made. It is at the cross. Let’s look at the same text in
another version:
For it was by God’s own decision that the Son has in himself the
full nature of God. Through the Son, then, God decided to bring the
whole universe back to himself. God made peace through his Son’s
sacrificial death on the cross, and so brought back to himself all
things, both on earth and in heaven. Colossians 1:19–20, GNT.
Notice two other passages in Ephesians that make the same point:
For he has made known to us in all wisdom and insight the mystery of his will, according to his purpose which he set forth in Christ
as a plan for the fulness of time, to unite all things in him, things in
heaven and things on earth. Ephesians 1:9–10, RSV.
Here we have a glimpse of the ending of the war, when God’s purpose is fulfilled and the whole universe will be united. Uniting all things
is the opposite of war; when you have unity, you also have peace. Now
to the other text in Ephesians:
. . . and to make all men see what is the plan of the mystery hidden
for ages in God who created all things; that through the church the
manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the principalities and powers in the heavenly places. Ephesians 3:9–10, RSV.
According to Ephesians, the way God is demonstrating the truth
about Himself and winning the war is through His church, through His
people. This is explained in a dramatic way in another of Paul’s letters:
“. . . we have become a spectacle to the world, to angels and to men.” 1
Corinthians 4:9, RSV. The Greek word for spectacle is theatron, from
which we get “theater.” Some saints might be reluctant to attend the
theater, but Paul tells us we live in a theater all the time. God’s stage.
And on this stage, He is demonstrating the truth about Himself by the
way He is dealing with His church.
• • • • •
There are no shortcuts to trust, or the Bible would be a
much briefer book.
• • • • •
God includes the whole family in the results of this demonstration:
“When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone to me.” John
12:32, GNT. The Good News Bible here expresses the real meaning of the
original. The word translated “everyone” is not limited to human beings.
It is the word for the entire universe, everyone and everything. Not just
people on this planet, but even the loyal angels, I believe, were drawn
closer to God by this costly demonstration. These verses say to me that
Christ died for sinless angels too. And they certainly needed no forgiveness or adjustment of their legal standing. Yet the Bible says they needed
the message of the cross as well.
The Larger View of the Gospel
So what is the message of the cross? Evidently, it’s much more than
the payment of a legal penalty so that somehow God can justly forgive
you and me. The cross was also needed by the loyal angels. And this
truly suggests that we ought to go back to the foot of the cross and join
the family of the universe in watching closely just how Jesus died. We
will listen very carefully to His words on the cross: “My God, My God,
why hast thou forsaken Me?” Matthew 27:46; Mark 15:34, KJV. What
does that mean? And how does that suffering and death restore peace to
God’s family? I believe that in the Great Controversy, all Christian
beliefs take on much broader significance.
• • • • •
God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him
out to be— arbitrary, vengeful, and severe. He is instead
precisely what His Son revealed Him to be.
• • • • •
The gospel most certainly is the good news about what God has
done for me and you. But in the larger great controversy setting, the
gospel is the truth about our gracious God. It is the truth that ends the
war, confirms the loyalty of the universe, and wins some of us back to
repentance and to trust. I believe that the most important of all our
beliefs is the truth about God. God is not the kind of person His enemies
have made Him out to be — arbitrary, vengeful, and severe. He is instead
precisely what His Son revealed Him to be. We believe the testimony of
Jesus when He said: “If you have seen Me, you have seen the Father.”
John 14:9. God is just as loving and gracious as His Son, just as willing
to forgive and heal.
Could there be any better news than that? To me, that’s the everlasting good news that maintains the loyalty of the universe. That is the
gospel that wins us back and will maintain our loyalty and trust for the
rest of eternity. And this is the message we have the high privilege of
sharing with people all over this planet. People who may not know they
are members of God’s family. People who deserve to know, and who
deserve to hear, this truth. So the ultimate question for this book to
address is: Can we be sure God is just like this? Jesus always welcomed
questions, and we ought to do the same.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: We’re calling this book Conversations About God.
But just above, you said that Jesus is the One who reveals God; if we’ve
seen Him, we’ve seen the Father. Then why shouldn’t this book be
called “Conversations About Jesus”?
• • • • •
God is just as loving and gracious as His Son; just as willing to forgive and heal.
• • • • •
Graham Maxwell: I’ve run into that question several times. Since
Jesus is the One who came to reveal the truth, why don’t we talk more
about Him? This implies some interesting things. If we believe that
Jesus Christ is God, when we talk about Christ we are talking about
God anyway. If the whole purpose of His coming to this earth is to
reveal the truth about His Father, He is also revealing the truth about
Himself. So whether we talk about God or Christ, we’re talking about
God. But I think it adds focus to our discussion to say that the ultimate
question really is about God. It is God who came in human form as
Christ; this is the ultimate method He used to reveal the truth about
Himself. In a sense, it is much ado about nothing when someone asks,
“Shall we talk about God, or shall we talk about Christ?”
Lou: If I’m hearing you rightly, you’re saying that Jesus Himself
would really be happiest if we’re talking about the One He came to
reveal.
Graham: I’m impressed that when Jesus was here, He would suggest, “Don’t look to Me, look to the Father.” John 5:19, 30, 8:28–29,
14:6–11, 15:15, 16:26–27. It suggests to me that we should always outdo
one another in giving honor. The Trinity does that. The Son is always
outdoing Himself to give honor to the Father. But I have noticed that it
comes back the other way as well — the Father gives the Son the name
above every other name. Philippians 2:9–11. And the Holy Spirit, in a
self-effacing way, is always drawing our attention to the Father and the
Son. John 4:23–24, 15:26, 16:13–14. The way those three divine Persons
behave is a model for us.
Lou: Here’s a related question: How can you really have a conversation about God? After all, how can we really know God? Take Paul’s
statement in Romans: “How unsearchable are His judgments and how
inscrutable are His ways.” Romans 11:33, RSV. If that’s the case, who
are we to question? God is sovereign, so why should we be sitting here
having conversations about God?
Graham: Ah, who are we to question the inscrutable ways of God?
And that’s in Romans. But we need to balance that with Romans 1:19–
20, where Paul says (in my words), “You’re without excuse if you don’t
know God.” So on the principle of taking the Bible as a whole, and not
just “here a little and there a little,” I would have to put Romans 1 alongside Romans 11.
I think when Paul is saying that God’s thoughts are so far above
ours (see also Isaiah 55:8–9), that is a reverent recognition that God is infinite. Think of all He knows! We’ll never fully understand God; we’re
mere creatures. And at times we need to be reminded of His infinite superiority. But then it’s marvelous that the Infinite One would want to be
known by us.
All through the Bible He says things like, “Israel is destroyed
because they don’t know Me” (see Hosea 4:6), and, “I’ve come to this
earth that you may know Me” (see John 17:1–5). So it’s pretty clear God
wants to be known. But we shouldn’t pretend we’re gods who could
know everything that He knows.
Lou: So we should not use the idea of God’s sovereignty as an
excuse to ignore issues related to His character.
Graham: I think where that idea really comes from is Romans 9,
where you have the verse: “Who are you to question God? Who are you
to answer back to God ?” Romans 9:14–26, especially 20–21. But Romans
9, I believe, has been misunderstood by some very saintly people, including a notable theologian in Reformation days. One really needs to put
Romans 9 in the whole context of Romans — certainly in the context of
chapters 1 through 9.
In Romans 1–8, Paul has been saying to his audience (which is made
up of both Jews and Gentiles), “I have great good news for you. God will
save all who trust Him — whether you are Jew or Gentile, bond or free,
male or female (Romans 1:16–17, 3:21–30). He’ll save everybody who
trusts Him.” And as Paul was developing chapters 1–8, he could sense
that certain members of his audience (descended from Abraham) were not
taking this too kindly, because they thought that they had a special relationship with God. It was as if God had made a deal with their ancestor
in their behalf. That’s why they were so concerned with things like their
genealogy.
When Paul got to the end of chapter 8, therefore, he sensed that
some of his readers would be quite offended. So in essence he turned to
them and said, “I sense that some of you don’t like what I’ve said, that
God is the kind of God that would save all who trust Him. But when you
think that way, aren’t you suggesting that you would run the universe
better than God? Are you saying God cannot save all who trust Him?
Let me tell you something: God is going to run this universe precisely as
He wishes. Just as the potter takes a lump of clay, and makes of the same
clay a vessel for honor, and a vessel for dishonor (Romans 9:21), so God
has the right — if He wants to exercise it — to run His universe any way
He likes!”
Some people take that out of context and say, “God takes the material we are all made of and makes some to be saved and some to be lost.
So what’s the use of trying to know Him at all? Our destiny has already
been determined.” No, what Paul is saying in Romans 9 is that God has
just as much authority as the potter — actually much more so. He created
this universe. He’s going to run it precisely as He wishes. And He won’t
ever change. You can count on it. Does Romans 9 mean that God is arbitrary? Not in the context of chapters 1–8 where Paul has already
explained how God runs the universe. God is so infinitely gracious that
He values nothing higher than our freedom, and will save all who trust
Him. But He doesn’t expect us to trust Him as a stranger, so at infinite
cost He has revealed the truth about Himself. And that’s what Paul’s
implied audience didn’t like. So Paul is really saying in Romans 9, “You
impudent, irreverent people. How dare you tell God how to run His universe! How does God run His universe? Please read Romans 1–8. God’s
treatment of the universe is infinitely gracious.”
Lou: But that raises another question: Why would a God who is
infinitely powerful, who can run the universe any way He wants to,
allow a conflict like the one we read about in the twelfth chapter of
Revelation? Why would He allow a war in heaven to happen?
Graham: That’s a great question. If God has that much authority
and power, how could a war in heaven even take place? This question is
the reason why those who stress the sovereignty of God have great difficulty allowing for a war in heaven. And it’s the reason many of the
Reformers really couldn’t use that sixty-sixth book of the Bible. Luther,
for example, says, “It was fancied that there was a war.” He just couldn’t
wrap his mind around the idea. But to me it’s one of the most wonderful
things about God. Though He had the infinite power necessary to stop
such a war before it even started, He did not do so. God must consider
something else of far greater value than our mere submission to His
power because He allowed Lucifer’s rebellion in heaven to grow and
grow. By secular standards of good administration, God was weak. It was
bad management. I mean, how long would a pastor last in our church if
there was such chaos in the membership? The committee would meet!
Lou: The pastor would move on, wouldn’t he!
Graham: Yes. Shall we ask God to move on, then, because of weakness on His part? We know He has infinite power, yet He allowed this
war to develop. He allowed the questions to arise. That tells me there is
something of even greater importance to God than our mere submission
to His infinite power.
Lou: Here’s a question related to the war in heaven. What about
the angel who seems to start the war, the one named “Day Star” or
Lucifer? If God knew that there would be all this trouble, and that
Lucifer would be at the center of it, why did He create Lucifer?
Graham: That, of course, raises the question whether God does
know everything in the future. And there are good saints who wonder
about that. I would rather find an explanation that would allow me to say
God can see the end from the beginning. The past, the present, and the
future, they’re all alike to Him. And yet I’m still free. My understanding would be that when God created Lucifer, He knew what Lucifer
would do. And yet He went ahead anyway. He knew what it would cost
Him. He knew what it would cost His children. And yet He went
ahead. And when you think of the anguish that has been involved in
solving this problem and settling this war, there must be something of
infinite value at stake, or God would not have done this.
He certainly had other options that might have seemed easier.
When Lucifer began to entertain these rebellious thoughts, God could
have eliminated him right there and then. What damage would that have
done? Well, the angels looking on might think, “I’d better not have bad
thoughts or I might get eliminated too.” But after eliminating Lucifer,
God could then have blotted out all memory of the elimination so no one
would know. And He could do that an infinite number of times and no
one would know but God.
So why didn’t He do it? Is it that He couldn’t live with the fact
that He was doing that? Or is it that He wants us to know what He did
do? He definitely did not take a shortcut. He allowed Lucifer to develop
these thoughts, and to spread them among the angels, knowing what it
would cost Him and cost His friends on this planet. We’ve all participated a little in the Great Controversy. But knowing the thousands of years
it would take, and all the misunderstanding and the anguish, God said,
“I will go ahead anyway.” And the angels understand this and tell Him,
“You did this magnificently. And we’re with you for the rest of eterni-
ty.” So what was at stake in this decision? That’s the big thing.
Lou: This perspective that you’re sharing here and throughout this
book includes a war, a crisis of distrust, and whether God can be trusted!
Graham: Right. It’s not about power. If it was about God’s
power, He could have settled things in a second. It would be easy to
show that God is more powerful than Satan. In fact, such a demonstration is hardly necessary, since even the Devil is already convinced. James
tells us that when the Devil thinks about the power of the One who
hung the whole vast universe in space, it scares him. He shudders with
fear (James 2:19). So I don’t think we should spend too much time arguing about God’s power. Of course He’s infinite in majesty and power.
The conflict is not over who has the power, but over who’s telling the
truth. God has been accused of abusing His power.
Lou: Graham, you mentioned that Martin Luther couldn’t see this
perspective and that he had trouble with the book of Revelation. Why
do you suppose he had that kind of trouble?
Graham: Why don’t we read it in his own words, from his Preface
to the book of Revelation, in English translation of course. “It [The book
of Revelation] approximates the Fourth Book of Esdras. I can in no way
detect that the Holy Spirit produced it.” And he gives his reasons. As
he looked at it, “Christ is neither taught nor known in the book of
Revelation,” even though it’s “The Revelation of Jesus Christ.” And
we know what his policy was for evaluating books in the Bible, because
in the Preface to James he wrote, “All the genuine and sacred books . . .
preach and inculcate Christ. . . .” If even Peter or Paul should write a
book, it’s not apostolic if it doesn’t teach Christ. And a little later on he
writes, “This is the principle that I use in my evaluation of books.” We
have a name for that: the “Christomonistic principle.” That’s the
“Christ alone” principle. If I don’t find Christ in the book, then it doesn’t belong in the canon. That’s a very good principle in theory. But
what if the one making the evaluation doesn’t have a full picture of
Christ? Based on his picture of Christ, Luther was ready to rule out four
books of the Bible.
Lou: Rather than letting these books expand his understanding and
picture of Christ.
Graham: Yes. It was a little backwards for Luther to do it that
way. But when you think of the many wonderful things he did, I suppose we should allow him that. But based on what we know today, can
we find Christ in the book of Revelation? I think so. So on the
Christomonistic principle which Luther laid down, I take all sixty-six
books seriously. The principle’s alright, but we’ve made a little progress
since then.
Lou: And that would be supported by the book of Revelation’s
own claim to be the “revelation of Jesus Christ.”
Graham: Right at the beginning (Revelation 1:1). And look at the
whole first chapter. It’s all about Christ, in His human form. And later
on in the book, it’s about how He’s coming back and what He’s doing
in the heavenly sanctuary. The book of Revelation is full of Him.
Lou: But now, Graham, in our reading in the book of Revelation,
which you shared with us, it seems so clear; there’s a statement here that
war broke out in heaven, and so on. But I’m wondering — how widely
is this perspective shared by the Christian world in general? That is, the
idea of a war, and the Great Controversy, this “larger view,” as you
refer to it.
Graham: It’s strange that not many know about this. It’s as if
there is a conspiracy of silence. Yet we’re finding more and more people
in the nineteenth century and earlier who did see glimpses of this larger
view. Since college days, I’ve always enjoyed Milton’s Paradise Lost,
Paradise Regained. There’s part of the picture there, not the full picture.
One of the best at expressing a larger view was a preacher named
Henry Melvill, who lived in England in the mid-nineteenth century. He
was a magnificent preacher, and his wife used to neatly write out his sermons for him to present in no less a place than St. Paul’s Cathedral in
London. Melvill preached about a crisis among the angels, how they
needed their loyalty confirmed by the very things God revealed through
the death of Jesus. And Melvill was no minor figure; after his death, he
was buried in St. Paul’s Cathedral, an honor restricted to a very few.
One person who particularly enjoyed his writings was Ellen White.
She had his book in her library. I don’t know anyone to this day who has
expressed the “larger view” as well as Ellen White. Her work was based
on all sixty-six Bible books and reading the marvelous writings of Melvill
and others. Let’s look at one place where she lays out this bigger picture:
But the plan of redemption had a yet broader and deeper purpose than the salvation of man. It was not for this alone that Christ
came to the earth; it was not merely that the inhabitants of this little world might regard the law of God as it should be regarded; but
it was to vindicate the character of God before the universe. To this
result of His great sacrifice — its influence upon the intelligences of
other worlds, as well as upon man — the Saviour looked forward
when just before His crucifixion He said: “Now is the judgment of
this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if
I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all unto Me.” John 12:31,
32. The act of Christ in dying for the salvation of man would not
only make heaven accessible to men, but before all the universe it
would justify God and His Son in their dealing with the rebellion
of Satan. It would establish the perpetuity of the law of God and
would reveal the nature and the results of sin. Ellen G. White,
Patriarchs and Prophets, 68–69.
Although the King James Version says “draw all men” here, Ellen
White leaves the word “men” out in this quotation. She says simply
“draw all,” which points to a much larger view of things. While there
were saints through the years who spoke about this bigger picture, Ellen
White is the one who summed it up the best to date, and seemed to
understand it the most clearly.
Lou: I suppose part of the problem has been our tendency to focus
on our own salvation. You have referred to how our salvation needs to
be seen in the larger perspective. What I’m wondering is, how does this
perspective affect Christian belief in general? Does it make a difference?
Graham: I don’t think it minimizes our Christian beliefs in any
way; it rather makes them more significant. As I mentioned earlier, the
gospel takes on a much broader meaning in the context of the Great
Controversy. But that’s not all. Some of us regard the Sabbath as a privilege to observe and a great blessing. A typical approach to the Sabbath
is preoccupied with what God has done for our own salvation and what
God has done for this planet. But if you limit your understanding to this
planet, then the Sabbath was given before sin. And as such it is merely
a test of our obedience, to show God’s authority and test our willingness
to obey.
• • • • •
Sin is much more than just breaking the rules, it is a breakdown of trust and trustworthiness.
• • • • •
In the larger view, however, the Sabbath was given to man after
sin entered the universe. Then it’s no longer an arbitrary test of obedience. It’s a great gift that God gave to remind us of all the things the
Bible associates with the Sabbath, things like the freedom and the perfection of Eden, and the freedom that He gave to all of His creatures.
God’s rescue of His people in the Exodus. And then the events of crucifixion week. The seventh-day Sabbath is connected with all of those.
Similarly, the law in the Larger View is God’s emergency measure
to help us. Paul specifically says that in Galatians 3:19. Take, for example,
The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. They were not to eat the
fruit of that tree in the garden. In the narrower view, which is preoccupied with what God has done for us on this planet, God said, “Don’t
touch that tree,” before sin. And that would simply be a test of their
obedience, or so it’s often explained. But in the larger, great controversy
view, they were told not to go near that tree after sin entered the universe. With that in mind, the tree was not so much a test of obedience
as something given to protect us. You see, God permitted Satan to tempt
Adam and Eve, but Satan was only allowed to approach them at that
particular tree. God was not limiting them; He was limiting Satan! You
see, the more one views things from the larger perspective, the less arbitrary God’s requirements, measures, and provisions look. He simply
looks a whole lot better in the great controversy view.
Lou: This definitely helps us understand the reason and the meaning behind God’s actions and, at times, lack of action. But this leads me
to one final question, “If God won the war at Calvary, then why isn’t
it over? Why is it still going on? In fact, why didn’t it end when God
threw Satan and his angels out of heaven?”
Graham: Obviously, the expulsion of Satan from heaven was a victory, a physical victory. But God was not satisfied with that alone. There
were still unresolved questions and wonderings among His family. And
so He waited. But when Jesus said, “It’s finished” (John 19:30), something was finished. And Revelation indicates He was recognized in heaven as having won the war (Revelation 5:6–14). So why does He still
wait? Is it that the war has been won in the minds of His children
throughout the universe, but not here on this planet? We’re still trying
to make up our minds. And it’s essential that we not only make up our
minds, but be so settled into it that we cannot be moved during the terrible events that will happen before the Second Coming. It is in mercy
that He waits.
Lou: I’m sure we’ll have more on this as the series progresses. Tell
us about the next chapter.
Graham: The next chapter deals with the question, “What Went
Wrong in God’s Universe?” What went wrong in the family? It will be
a fresh look at sin in the larger setting of the Great Controversy. Sin is
much more than just breaking the rules; it is a breakdown of trust and
trustworthiness. This will take us to the heart of the issue in the war.
Until we know what’s gone wrong, how can we understand God’s
efforts to set things right?
