Chapter Ten
The Reminder of the Evidence
God values nothing higher than our freedom. But if that is the case, why
has He placed in the heart of the “royal law of liberty” (based on James
2:8, 12) a command to remember the Sabbath? As Paul explained, God’s
laws were given to help us, to protect us in our ignorance and immaturity, to lead us back to trust (Galatians 3:23–25). So the title of this chapter
was chosen to suggest that the Sabbath is another of God’s provisions to
help us during this crisis of distrust.
Unfortunately, the Sabbath has been widely misunderstood in a
way that supports Satan’s charges that God is arbitrary, exacting, and
severe. Even among devout observers of the seventh day, the Sabbath
has often been misrepresented, as was the case on that very sad Friday
when Jesus was crucified. But if we put the Sabbath in the setting of all
sixty-six Bible books and in the larger setting of the great controversy
over the character and government of God, I believe that all arbitrariness evaporates.
The best known biblical statement about the Sabbath is in Exodus
20, right in the middle of the Ten Commandments. The commandment
runs from verse 8 to verse 11, but we will emphasize two portions of the
passage:
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. . . . For in six days the
Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it. Exodus 20:8, 11, RSV.
As already mentioned, James called the Ten Commandments (the
Decalogue) the “royal law of liberty.” James 1:25; 2:12. Not the “royal
law of subjugation, surrender, and bondage,” but the “royal law of freedom.” Yet a first reading of this particular commandment could seem
somewhat arbitrary, couldn’t it? Is God laying upon His children an
arbitrary requirement, just to show His authority and test their willingness to obey? But the message of all sixty-six books, and certainly of
these conversations about God, is that there is no arbitrariness in our
God. Rather, He paid a high price to deny any trace of arbitrariness!
We’ll come back to this larger theme in the later chapters entitled
“God’s Law Is no Threat to Our Freedom” (Chapter Twelve) and
“God’s Emergency Measures” (Chapter Eleven).
God’s laws were not given to be a burden or to restrict us. God values nothing higher than our freedom. When you go through all the sixtysix books and you come to the last one, the book of Revelation, you note
that God is still asking us to remember Him as our Creator. The first
angel of Revelation 14 says: “Honor God and give him glory, for his time
has come to sit in judgment. Worship the Creator of heaven and earth,
the Creator of the sea and the springs.” Revelation 14:7, NAB, 1970.
Note how this excellent Catholic translation renders the opening phrase
“honor God” instead of “fear God.”
The Sabbath and Creation
Now when we read that first angel’s message to “worship the
Creator of heaven and earth, the Creator of the sea and the springs,” we
are reminded that the first mention of the Sabbath comes in the Bible at
the end of creation week. Think back in imagination to the very dramatic
events of that first week of this earth’s history. The war had begun
already in heaven. Satan had already leveled his charges and his accusations. One-third of the angels had already agreed with him that God is
not worthy of our love and our trust.
Right in the middle of that devastating crisis, God invites His family to watch Him as He creates yet another world — this time, ours. How
easily He could have created our world with a snap of His fingers, in just
an instant of time. But in the dramatic and significant setting of the Great
Controversy, He chose instead to do it in six twenty-four hour days. On
the first day, all He said was, “Let there be light” (Genesis 1:3). That’s
all. And then on days two, three, four, and five, God in unhurried
majesty and drama unfolded His plans for our earth. By the sixth day,
what a beautiful place this was! Where now were Satan’s charges that
God was selfish?
The most unselfish of God’s gifts in creation was freedom. He created us in His own image with power to think and to do. He created us
free to either love and trust Him, or hate Him and spit in His face,
because both positive and negative outcomes have, in fact, occurred. He
created us able to reject Him! God even allowed Satan to approach our
first parents at The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. And He
didn’t hide that tree in some dark corner of the garden; He put it right
in the middle near The Tree of Life, so that Adam and Eve would see it
all the time. “In the middle of the garden were the tree of life and the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil.” Genesis 2:9, NIV.
Now the God we know could be trusted not to allow our first, inexperienced parents to be tested more than they were able to resist. You
know He would not do that. And so Satan was only allowed to approach
them at The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. Adam and Eve
were warned not to risk a confrontation with their wily foe. In that
warning God was already demonstrating the meaning of that famous key
text: “But God keeps his promise, and he will not allow you to be tested
beyond your power to remain firm.” 1 Corinthians 10:13, GNT. Paul
could have said instead, “God can be trusted . . . ,” that’s what God keeping His promises is all about.
You see, that tree was not put there as an arbitrary test of obedience. That tree was put there to help them, to protect them. What
becomes evident in light of the sixty-six is that The Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil was not placed there before sin, but after
sin. The war had already begun in heaven. The Enemy was already on
the loose. If the tree had been placed in the garden before sin, it would
have been an arbitrary test. But coming after sin, it was there to help
them and protect them like every other one of God’s gracious laws.
Then God stunned the universe by sharing with us some of His own
marvelous creative power. God so designed it that when a man and a
woman come together in love, they are able to create little people in
their own image.
• • • • •
God so designed it that when a man and a woman come
together in love, they are able to create little people in their
own image.
• • • • •
Isn’t it interesting to watch our children and our grandchildren?
They look so much like us. They behave like us, at our best points and
at our worst points. They truly reflect our image and God designed it to
be this way: “Have many children, so that your descendants will live all
over the earth and bring it under their control.” Genesis 1:28, GNT.
That was His original plan. The Song of Solomon right in the middle of
the Bible reminds us that this whole thing was God’s idea. That we
should be male and female and feel the way we do about each other, and
say the things we do to each other, and come together in love, and create
little people in our own image. He thought that all up Himself.
He could have created us to look like E.T. or maybe little green people with antennae. And babies could have come in test tubes. But that is
not the way that God designed it. That worries some people. Others marvel: “What kind of a God must He be to think it up this way?” And then
to put a whole book in the middle of the Bible that confuses some people
and delights others? Think what The Song of Solomon says about our
God; reminding us of the original creation week and of the Sabbath that
came at the end of it. The universe watched all this, the universe that had
heard the charges against God. And when creation was over they said,
“That’s very good (Genesis 1:31).” Love and admiration for God must
have known no bounds. Where now were Satan’s charges that God does
not respect the freedom of His creatures? Or that He’s very selfish in His
use of authority and power?
The conclusion of this part of the creation story is in Genesis 2:
On the sixth day God completed all the work he had been doing,
and on the seventh day he ceased from all his work. God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on that day he ceased from all the
work he had set himself to do. Genesis 2:2–3, NEB.
When the text tells us that God “rested,” it does not mean that He was
tired. It was more like an attorney saying, “I have presented all my evidence. I now ‘rest’ my case.” God ceased from all His work. Can you
imagine how the universe spent the next twenty-four hours as they celebrated with God the first seventh-day Sabbath?
Now this Sabbath was not Adam and Eve’s seventh day. It was
their second day. And if the Sabbath were designed to give us a rest
every seventh day since our creation, we should be observing Thursday.
The first Sabbath was God’s day of celebration. He called on His family
throughout the universe to join with Him in reflecting on the significance
of what had been done. They were invited to reflect on the answers He
had given to Satan’s charges, the falsity of Satan’s accusations, and the
truth about freedom, love, and generosity on the part of our gracious
heavenly Father.
• • • • •
The Sabbath was given after sin, not before.
• • • • •
You see, the Sabbath was given after sin, not before. If it was given
before, we might think of it as an arbitrary test of our obedience. But it
was given after sin, because we needed it. It must have seemed to the
universe looking on that the Great Controversy had been won that
Friday night. But no event of creation week had answered Satan’s most
serious charge, the charge that God had lied to His children when He
warned that the consequence of sin is death. Nothing during creation
week, eloquent as it was, spoke to that issue.
The Sabbath and the Cross
God waited thousands of years to answer that question. Finally, in
the fullness of time, God sacrificed Himself in the Son, to demonstrate
the truthfulness of His word. He did not ask us to prove the truthfulness
of His word. He could have, by leaving us to die. Instead, He Himself
came and died that awful death. And Jesus knew why He was dying. He
saw it all in the larger context of the Great Controversy. He knew about
Satan’s charges. So as He died He said, “It is finished” (John 19:30). Just
as God, at the end of creation week, said, “I’ve finished the work of creation” (Genesis 2:2–3).
When Jesus died on the cross, then, He was saying, “We finished
it all.” The most important answer to the most devastating accusation
had been given at infinite cost. But what exactly was finished? Jesus
said earlier: “I have finished the work which You have given Me to do.”
John 17:4, NKJV. His work was to reveal the character of God to
angels and to men (John 1:18; 12:31–32; 14:6–9; 15:10). On Friday
evening, when Jesus died at the end of crucifixion week, all the major
questions in the Great Controversy had been answered and all of
Satan’s charges against God had been met. And how significant it is
that the next day was the seventh-day Sabbath. Jesus could have gone
to heaven on Friday to hear the universe tell Him that it was more than
enough; everything was clear. Instead He waited over the Sabbath
hours.
Can you imagine what the universe was doing during those
Sabbath hours? Surely the whole universe paused to reflect on the significance of what they had seen. They joined with the Father in celebrating the costly victory that had been won, and in thanking Him for the
costly evidence that had been presented. Because of the cross, they knew
that the universe was secure for eternity. As I understand it, this is the
Sabbath God asks us to remember. We need to pause and be reminded of
those truths in which the angels rejoice. This is certainly no mere test of
our obedience. Caught up in the Great Controversy as we are, we need
the message of the seventh day. The Sabbath was made for us, we
weren’t made for the Sabbath. Surely that is what Jesus meant when He
said: “The Sabbath was made for the good of man. . . .” Mark 2:27, GNT.
So were all of God’s laws!
The Sabbath in All Sixty-Six
As you read through the sixty-six books, the meaning of the
Sabbath is repeated and enlarged. For example, at Sinai, in the Ten
Commandments, the Sabbath is connected with creation (Exodus 20:11).
Then when you read on, John and Paul make it plain that the One who
created us was none other than Jesus Christ. John wrote: “Through him
all things were made; without him nothing was made that has been
made.” John 1:3, NIV. Combine that with Paul’s comment in
Colossians:
For by him all things were created; things in heaven and on earth,
visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him. Colossians 1:16,
NIV.
Think of the significance of that. The One who came to save us is
the One who made us in the beginning. And who would know better
how to heal the damage done by sin? The gentle Jesus who walked so
softly among men and then died the way He did on Calvary, is not some
weak, ordinary person. He is the supreme all-powerful Creator of the
whole vast universe. That’s the One who died on Calvary. Nor did God
send some subordinate heavenly person; not even the leader of His
angels. The Creator Himself came, the One who is equal with God, for
He actually is God (John 1:1).
Every time we observe the seventh-day Sabbath we are publicly
acknowledging to God, to our friends and to ourselves, that we have
faith in Jesus as our Saviour, our Creator and our God. What kind of person is our God? The reply comes every Sabbath. God the Father is just
as gracious as the Son. If Christ is Creator God, and we want to know
what our God is like, all we have to do is look at Christ. In pointing to
Jesus and creation, every Sabbath also reminds us what the Father is like.
There are other ways in which the Sabbath helps strengthen our
faith. God Himself speaks in Exodus 31: “Keep the Sabbath, my day of
rest, because it is a sign between you and me for all time to come, to
show that I, the Lord, have made you my own people.” Exodus 31:13,
GNT. And in Ezekiel 20 He says: “Make the Sabbath a holy day, so that
it will be a sign of the covenant we made, and will remind you that I am
the Lord your God.” Ezekiel 20:20, GNT. He also says: “I made the keeping of the Sabbath a sign of the agreement between us, to remind them
that I, the Lord, make them holy.” Ezekiel 20:12, GNT.
• • • • •
The Sabbath is about God. He created us free in the beginning. But when we lost our freedom, He used His creative
power to set us free again. The Sabbath is always connected
with freedom.
• • • • •
Note that the Sabbath is a reminder of a very important truth
about the Lord our God and His relationship with His people. His people are an unholy, sinful bunch! Yet God is saying to them, “I have not
abandoned you. I am still working to save and heal you. I still regard you
as My people.” Salvation is not merely forgiveness, but also the healing
of the damage done by sin, making us holy people. Some of us, therefore,
keep the seventh-day Sabbath to show that only the Creator can heal the
damage done. Only the One who made us in the beginning could restore
us to what we used to be. He has the creative power, and it requires creative power. Surely it’s no less a miracle to take damaged merchandise
and restore it than to create it perfectly in the beginning! That is why
David prayed: “Create in me a clean heart, O God.” Psalm 51:10, KJV.
The very same creative power is necessary now to make us trustworthy,
holy children of God. Now, we cannot do this by ourselves. Some try by
self-discipline and restraint. But it is only by faith and trust in our
Creator that all the damage done by sin can be perfectly restored.
There are other aspects of the Sabbath mentioned in the Bible.
When Moses repeated the Ten Commandments in Deuteronomy, he
gave a different reason for keeping the Sabbath than the one he gave in
Exodus.
Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the Lord your God
brought you out with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and for
that reason the Lord your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath
day. Deuteronomy 5:15, NEB.
Now that’s no contradiction or lapse of memory on the part of the elderly leader. The Sabbath is about God. He created us free in the beginning. But when we lost our freedom, He used His creative power to set
us free again. Note that the Sabbath is always connected with freedom.
There is another aspect of the Sabbath mentioned in Hebrews 4.
The Sabbath there is described as a type and a foretaste of the rest to
come. The apostle says that when Israel entered Canaan, they physically
entered the Promised Land. They did not, however, enter God’s rest,
because they didn’t trust Him. “There remains, therefore, a sabbath-like
rest to the people of God” (based on Hebrews 4:9). That is, if we have
been led to really trust God, we begin to enter into that sabbath-like rest
now. But certainly in the earth made new, we will know completely
what that sabbath-like rest is all about. “So there must still be a promised
Sabbath of Rest for God’s people.” Hebrews 4:9, Goodspeed. But look at
the way The Jerusalem Bible puts it: “There must still be, therefore, a
place of rest reserved for God’s people, the seventh-day rest.”
The True Meaning of the Sabbath
You see, the Sabbath has answered many of the basic questions of
thoughtful people through the years. Questions such as: Where have we
come from? Why are we here? Where do we go in the future? And above
all, what kind of a person is our God, and what does He want of His children? The Sabbath all through the years has answered those four questions. Where have we come from? We were made in the image of God at
Creation. Why are we here? How do we attain to the greatest good in
life? Our whole purpose in the present is restoration from the damage
done by sin, through faith in God. The Sabbath encourages us to rest
from the futile striving to heal ourselves. Instead, we are encouraged to
actively discover all the good things that come to those who trust God.
And where do we go in the future? The Sabbath has always pointed forward to the Second Coming and the earth made new. And what about
our God? Every Sabbath we are reminded that God is just like Christ our
Creator, for Christ is God. Is there any information Satan would like to
hide more than this? No surprise, then, that Satan seeks to confuse the
meaning of the Sabbath. Notice Moffatt’s rendering of that Ezekiel 20:12
text: “I gave them my Sabbath to mark the tie between me and them, to
teach them that it is I, the Eternal, who sets them apart.” Most of the
world has broken that tie. The last message of God to the world is the
restoration of that tie. It’s a message of love and trust.
Keeping the Sabbath is not legalism, it is not God saying, “If you
don’t keep this day, I will kill you.” Rather, whenever we preach Christ
as our Creator, our Saviour, and the One who is coming again, whenever
we preach that God is like His Son, we are preaching the message of the
seventh day. According to the sixty-sixth book, the world will be divided into two sides at the very end, the dragon and the remnant.
Revelation 12:17, KJV. Revelation 13 speaks of Satan’s final campaign,
and that the whole world will be worshiping him, except the few
described in Revelation 14: “This calls for endurance on the part of
God’s people, those who obey God’s commandments and are faithful to
Jesus.” Revelation 14:12, GNT. In that day, the intelligent, wholehearted observance of the seventh-day Sabbath will represent this very faithfulness and loyalty to Jesus. There will be a group who still worship
Jesus as their Creator and their God.
Notice that the Sabbath is really not about us. It is about God. I
like to think that is why we put it in our name: Seventh-day Adventist.
We didn’t put it in there to say something good about us, but to say that
we have taken a position about God. I believe a real Seventh-day
Adventist is a Christian who accepts and believes all that the Sabbath
has to say about our God. I wish it always meant that.
Someday God will recreate our world and give it to His trusting
saints. We know that the world as we know it has to be purified by fire:
“The elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burned up.” 2 Peter 3:10, KJV. A burned up
earth would be no place to live, so after that there will be a re-creation:
“Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the
first earth had passed away.” Revelation 21:1, RSV. And Isaiah adds:
“Behold, I will create new heavens and a new earth.” Isaiah 65:17, NIV.
How do you think God will create our world the next time? He, of
course, could do it in an instant, as He could have during creation week.
But patient Teacher that He is, is it possible that He might do it in days
one, two, three, four, five, and six again? Just to say something to saints
that have questions about that simple Genesis account. I can see Him
doing it like that and smiling the whole week. But there will be one difference between the creation and the re-creation. There will be no need
to create another Adam and Eve. He will just open the pearly gates and
welcome His children home.
• • • • •
God designed the Sabbath to be a day of freedom, peace, love
and trust. But most of all, it is a day to remember and be
with our God.
• • • • •
Isaiah describes how in the new earth we will be delighted to meet
and worship our God: “Month by month at the new moon, week by
week on the sabbath, all mankind shall come to bow down before me,
says the Lord.” Isaiah 66:23, NEB. If on the first Sabbath in the new earth
God should say, “Children, would you like to join with Me in celebrating? I’d like to keep this first Sabbath as the most special one we have
ever had.” Would you say, “Oh, no! There we go — back under the law
again. Why do You need to put an arbitrary test of our obedience upon
us? Haven’t we proven that we can be trusted? How could You talk
about the Sabbath still?”
Would you say that to God? Think of all there would be to remember. Can you imagine the first twenty-four hour Sabbath in the new
earth? What a celebration! And if at the end of that first happy Sabbath,
God would say, “I have enjoyed this so much, I would like to do this
again every week from here on,” would you say, “Well, one is surely
enough. Do we have to do it again and again?” No, Isaiah says it will be
our delight to meet and celebrate with God.
Summing up. Is Sabbath-keeping arbitrary legalism? It can be. And
it was on that sad Friday nearly two thousand years ago. But as God
designed it, it is supposed to be a monument to freedom. It is supposed
to remind us of the evidence, that infinitely costly evidence, that God is
not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be. He is not
arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving and severe. He gave us the
Sabbath to remind us of that everlasting truth. He designed it to be a day
of freedom, peace, love, and trust. But most of all, it is a day to remember
and be with our God.
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: You’ve laid a great deal of emphasis upon the fact
that you don’t see the Sabbath as arbitrary, something imposed as a kind
of test. And you’ve certainly provided a great deal of meaning to the
Sabbath. But I’ve heard people raise this question, “All of that may be
true, but if so, why couldn’t one keep the Sabbath on another day? Does
it really matter? Everyone agrees that nine of the commandments are
important because if you really love God and your fellow human beings,
that’s the way you’re going to act. But why the seventh day in particular?”
Graham Maxwell: The word “arbitrary” suggests that there is no
reason, that God ordered it just because He wanted to, just to show His
authority. I would say if it really were arbitrary, it could be any day. But
it’s the seventh day because it’s so loaded with reasons. Did any of you
men ever try this on your wife? “It doesn’t matter when we celebrate
our anniversary this year, why don’t we have it some other day?” I
don’t think she’d go for it.
On top of that, the Bible adds meaning after meaning and reason
after reason for the seventh day, which makes it less and less arbitrary.
It seems to me that no other of God’s commands is associated with so
many meanings. It is the least arbitrary of them all. What bothers me
most about considering it as arbitrary is the thought that if it is arbitrary, the only reason why we keep it is to prove that we are God’s good
people. We are the only ones who obey. Whereas I understand the purpose of the Sabbath is to say something about Him. But those who keep
the Sabbath as meeting an arbitrary requirement are simply saying to the
world, “Look, there aren’t many in the world who are good, but we keep
the seventh day.” The seventh day is not to say something about us. It
is to say something about God. So that is an important difference.
Lou: So the meaning inherent in the seventh day makes that the
Sabbath day?
Graham: Yes, because He chose to create the world the way He did.
Now He did make a decision to do it slowly, but I think to do it slowly
is not arbitrary. The universe was watching. The charges had to be met.
And God in His own good time, and in that very dramatic way, unfolded
His plans for our world. And every day was saying more of the truth
about Him, and the falsity of Satan’s charges. That was a dramatic week!
Lou: I can hear one of our friends asking, “In the light of all this,
do I have to keep the Sabbath to be saved? If I don’t keep the Sabbath,
am I going to be lost?”
Graham: Ah, that reflects on our discussion earlier of what sin is
(Chapter Two). If you think of sin as just breaking the rules, then one
might follow that line of thought: If I break that rule, I’ll be lost. It all
depends whether there is a distrust and a rebelliousness involved in a
failure to keep the Sabbath. I think, rather, the Sabbath was made to be
a great benefit to us. If I don’t observe it, I lose. If I don’t take my medicine, I lose. God offers it to us. There are some who have never heard of
it. I don’t think the thief on the cross ever kept one. But in the legal
model, if you violate that rule like any other, then you’re out, because sin
is a breaking of the rules. But in my view, sin is internal distrust,
rebelliousness and unwillingness to listen. If the gift God has given
us inspires a hostility within you, a rebelliousness within you, an unwillingness to listen, that would be a serious thing. Because that’s where the
problem began.
Lou: Here’s another question: “In Colossians 2 doesn’t Paul say
that the Sabbath has been nailed to the cross? And in light of that, doesn’t Paul say that no one should judge you regarding what you eat or
drink, or religious festivals or even a Sabbath day?” Colossians 2:16.
What about Colossians 2?
Graham: That question is important enough for a whole chapter,
but I’ll try to deal with the basics in a paragraph or two. I think first we
need to note just what it was that was nailed to the cross. The King
James Version says it was “the handwriting of ordinances” (Colossians
2:14). Many take that to be the law. But the first key word is literally
“hand writing” (Greek: cheirographon), a word compound combining
“hand” and “writing.” The second is “requirements” (Greek: dogmasin).
The phrase “handwritten document of requirements” is a technical term
for a legal obligation. The “document” contains the legal sentence that
stood against us because of our rebellion and sin. That is what was nailed
to the cross.
When people read this text to suggest that the Sabbath was nailed
to the cross, that reading creates a serious difficulty. You see, whatever
the “handwritten document of requirements” is, the text says it was
“contrary to us” (Colossians 2:14, KJV — Greek: hupenantion) or “hostile
to us.” Colossians 2:14, NASB. In other words, Jesus took it out of the
way because it was bad for us. But nowhere in the Bible is the Sabbath
pictured as against us, or bad for us. Rather, it was given to help us. Did
Jesus say, “The Sabbath was made for you, but in a short while I’m
going to nail it to the cross because it’s been against you”? No, the
Sabbath was made “for our sake” (Mark 2:27, Greek: dia ton anthrôpon).
So some interpreters have been nailing the wrong thing to the cross!
Rather, when Jesus died He took care of the sin problem. He took care
of the sentence against us, or whatever word you want to use there. And
I think when Paul says, “Don’t let anyone judge you with respect to the
Sabbath, either” (Colossians 2:16), he was saying, “You’re right. Don’t
go around condemning people who disagree with you about the
Sabbath.”
Paul did not want us to condemn anybody for anything. That’s not
our business. His message was the same in Colossians 2 as in Romans 14:
“One man esteems one day as better than another, while another man
esteems all days alike. Let every one be fully convinced in his own mind.”
Romans 14:5, RSV. “Why do you pass judgment on your brother?”
Romans 14:10, RSV. I include the seventh-day Sabbath in that. We are
in no position ever to criticize or condemn anyone who disagrees over
this matter of the Sabbath. Paul says, “Each of us shall give account of
himself to God.” Romans 14:12, RSV.
So going back to Colossians, something that was against us was
nailed to the cross. And once we understand how God has handled this
problem of distrust and rebellion in the universe, we won’t go around
condemning other people. But in my own heart I’m very much persuaded that the Sabbath is for me. I wouldn’t want to waste it. I hope I can
make it look good to other people so they won’t waste it either. We
should present it as a gift, not as an obligation.
• • • • •
The essence of legalism is preoccupation with one’s legal
standing with God.
• • • • •
Lou: Graham, some of our friends of other faiths see keeping of the
Sabbath as legalistic. When you’re concerned about sundowns and what
is appropriate to do on the Sabbath, aren’t you back into a kind of
bondage, where you’re so careful about these things? Isn’t that legalism?
Graham: That word “legalism” needs to be defined, and in Chapter
Twelve we’ll have more to say about it. But to me, the essence of legalism is preoccupation with one’s legal standing with God. Many of the
same people who think Sabbath keepers are legalistic are themselves
utterly concerned with their legal standing before God. They thank God
that His Son came and paid the penalty so that they could be in good
legal standing. It seems to me that if you have a legal model, you’re a
legalist, whether or not you observe the Sabbath. But in the Larger
View, you’re saying, “God, I don’t want to miss out on a thing You have
given me.” The Sabbath is a gift that points us to so many of God’s acts
of blessing. We keep the Sabbath as a blessing, not as a burden.
Lou: It makes so much difference whether a person is keeping the
Sabbath as a requirement or keeping it as a celebration of the glorious
things that the Sabbath stands for.
Graham: Yes, it’s supposed to be all about freedom. If, in the middle of church, people do not feel free, maybe they should walk out, take
a breath of fresh air and decide whether they want to come back in or
not. Nobody should be sitting in church because they have to.
Everybody should be in church because they feel good about it.
Lou: You might lose your audience! What if some children hear
about that comment and decide not to go to church anymore?
Graham: Well, that’s a different story. It makes me think of the
next chapter, “God’s Emergency Measures.” You can’t expect little children to understand these things. For example, they won’t brush their
teeth because it’s good to brush their teeth. They brush their teeth
because Mommy says so. They don’t want to upset Mommy. She might
take “emergency measures.” Our little children might not gladly follow
us to church. But while you want to preserve their freedom, you also
want to teach them responsibility. So when it is time to go to church you
say, “Billy, we’re leaving, and you’re coming, too.” So there are children
who sit in the pews under some duress. But you hope they’ll sit there
long enough to hear the pastor tell them that God values nothing higher
than their freedom, and you hope that one day they’ll choose to continue
these things on their own.
Lou: They not only need the pastor to tell them, they need their
parents to show them. One more thing. When we talk about the seventh
day, we’re talking about thousands of years, and the question has been
asked, “How do you know what day is the seventh day? Could we be
mistaken?”
Graham: Nothing has meant more to devout Jews than the seventh-day Sabbath. Jews can certainly look back to when the manna fell,
double on Friday and none on Saturday. When that happened, everyone
knew that was the seventh day — by God’s direction. And no devout
Jew has lost track of the weekly Sabbath since that time. I would say
that’s not debatable. We definitely know.
Lou: Jesus didn’t seem confused about it when He was here, either,
and even the idea of Sunday as a day of resurrection would confirm the
consistency of the weekly cycle.
Now the Sabbath commandment says, “Thou shalt not do any
work, thou nor thy manservant . . .” and so forth (Exodus 20:10). Is the
Sabbath a day to just sit in a rocking chair in total idleness? What is the
meaning of the phrase, “Thou shalt not do any work”?
• • • • •
It almost seems hazardous that God would say about the
Sabbath, “In it thou shalt not do any work,” yet not tell us
what work is.
• • • • •
Graham: It almost seems hazardous that God would say, “In it
thou shalt not do any work,” yet not tell us what work is. I take that as
a compliment. God says, “The day is yours. I have suggested its many
meanings. If you don’t want to keep it, I won’t make you keep it. Just
to sit there under duress and do nothing all day is not keeping the
Sabbath. It’s supposed to be a delight.” And so God leaves it up to us
to decide what work is. But many devout people through the years have
consulted their theologians to determine what work is. In fact, I have a
very large volume which describes Sabbath work. This book, called the
Mishnah, says, “There are forty kinds of work save one.” That means
there are thirty-nine categories of work listed.
Each of the thirty-nine categories is broken down into many subcategories. How far may you walk on the Sabbath? May you carry a pencil on the Sabbath? How many letters can you write on the Sabbath? I
don’t mean epistles, I mean letters of the alphabet, all spelled out. The
beauty of that system seems to be, you always know whether you’re
keeping the Sabbath or not. But those many rules actually leave you
fearful that you may have broken the Sabbath. That is why Jesus said,
“You have placed burdens on people that are too heavy to bear.” The
God of the Sabbath intended it to remind us of Him. But just how to do
that is left up to us, and I like that.
Lou: A “Dear Abby” column once responded to a girl who wrote
in saying she was going to marry a Seventh-day Adventist, and she wondered what that might mean. Abby suggested that she ought to talk to
the man’s pastor and find out. But then another person wrote in and
said, “I know about Seventh-day Adventists. If you marry a Seventhday Adventist, there are a whole lot of things you won’t be able to do.”
Among these, the person suggested that the girl and her husband would
never have marital relations on the Sabbath. Some think Isaiah 58 says
you shouldn’t do anything that’s your own pleasure on the Sabbath. Is
God wanting us to be unhappy on the Sabbath?
Graham: When I heard about that column, I did a little research on
the meaning of Isaiah 58:13. It really reads, “If you restrain your foot on
the Sabbath from doing your business on My holy day, if you call the
Sabbath delightful, and Yahweh’s holy day honorable, if you honor it by
refraining from business, from pursuing gain and from excessive talk,
then you will delight in Yahweh, and I will make you ride upon the
heights of the earth.” Isaiah 58:13–14, The Anchor Bible.
Many other versions agree that the word “pleasure” is better translated “business.” You are invited on the Sabbath to enjoy yourself all you
like, but don’t do your own business on that day. Don’t pursue your
own interests on that day. It even says, “Value My holy day and honor it
by not traveling, working or talking idly on that day.” Or as The
Jerusalem Bible puts it, “Abstaining from travel, from doing business and
from gossip.” But the main point is, “Call the Sabbath a delight.” We’re
supposed to enjoy the day, rather than pursue our own business or our
own worldly gain on that day.
Lou: How can you command someone to “call the Sabbath a
delight”?
Graham: We know from experience you can’t do that. When your
girls were growing up, did you ever say to one of them, “Now look,
don’t make any more faces. I want you to eat your spinach”?
“Yes, Daddy.”
 “Yes, but I want you to enjoy it.”
 “Yes, Daddy.”
 “I want you to tell me how delicious it is.”
 “Daddy, I’d be fibbing if I did, and I’d be breaking one of the commandments.”
There’s no way you can order somebody to enjoy something. But
consider the things that God desires the most: Love? You can’t command
it. Trust? You can’t command it. The enjoyment of the Sabbath? You
can’t command it. It’s an invitation. We either do it or we don’t, and if
we really observe the day, we do it in the highest sense of freedom and
it is truly a delight.
Lou: Here is a somewhat unrelated question. “The Larger View,”
this person writes, “seems very intricate, very subtle and needing a lot
of study. Does this imply that a simpler view is still necessary for the
masses of people who do not have the time or the knowledge to understand the Larger View?” And here’s a related question, “What is the
truth about God? I hear it must be simple, and yet it seems almost too
complicated to encompass. Please help me understand.”
How would you respond to these?
Graham: Ah, those are very fair questions. I think that the number
one characteristic of the Larger View is its simplicity, it’s actually not
complicated. It might, however, require a good deal of study. There is no
shortcut to this. But the more one studies, the less complicated it
becomes. When you apply the very best scholarship available to you,
and you do a thorough job on the sixty-six books, you come up with this
view about our God. All He asks of us is trust; not trust in a stranger,
or trust in mere claims, but trust on the basis of demonstration. I don’t
think anything could be simpler than that.
But I see validity to the question. Paul on Mars Hill delivered a
magnificent address (Acts 17:22–31). He quoted the philosophers. He
quoted the poets. He used long words (Acts 17:22). He even won a few
of them that way (Acts 17:34). But in 1 Corinthians he says, “I’ll never
preach like that again, magnificent as it was. This one thing I’ll do from
here on: I will preach the message about Christ and Him crucified”
(based on 1 Corinthians 2:1–2). So Paul, with all his scholarship, eventually focused in on the all-important thing. When he preached Christ and
Him crucified, he was preaching a larger view about the One who died
for angels as well as men. So his focus on the cross led him to a bigger
picture than he had before. The thief on the cross knew enough to be
saved, but I wouldn’t want to settle for that myself. So I’m going to
keep on investigating. But if my discourses become more complicated,
I’m moving in the wrong direction. I like the implication of these questions. It ought to be clear. It ought to be simple. But there are no shortcuts to that kind of clarity and simplicity.
Lou: Here’s a question that really touched my heart. This person
wrote, “How are we, who have been raised as Seventh-day Adventist
Christians, and have been taught to fear God and His judgments, able to
change to a love relationship? I am afraid of God! How do I dispel this
fear?”
Graham: The One who would love to hear that question the most
would be God Himself. If you came face to face with God and said,
“God, I hesitate to tell You this, but I’m scared,” I wonder what He
would do. Would He say, “I appreciate that”? Or would He say, “I think
maybe I’d better not talk to you any longer, you’re so scared. I’ll send
for My Son.”
In practical terms, the solution is to become convinced from
Scripture that the One who came down to earth is fully God. We’re not
afraid of Jesus. Yet the One who was with us is no less than God! The
Sabbath reminds us that Jesus is the Almighty Creator. When we know
Him, we can truly accept the “testimony of Jesus.” The ultimate testimony of Jesus is, “Do you want to know what My Father is like? If
you’ve seen Me, you’ve seen the Father” (John 14:9). We find it hard to
believe that. It takes a little time. We need to read it over and over until
we’re fully convinced. The enemy is opposed to our knowing this, so he
will throw up every roadblock he can to keep us from believing this
incredible truth.
Lou: In the next chapter we’re going to talk about “God’s
Emergency Measures.” Those are the actions of God in the Bible that
have raised a lot of questions.
Graham: Yes, because these measures can be misunderstood as supporting Satan’s charges. But when I think about God’s use of these emergency measures, it speaks very well of Him. He took a number of risks
when He chose to run things the way that He has. We’ll get into all that
in the next chapter.
