Chapter Twenty
At Peace with our Heavenly Father
We began this book by remembering that there once was peace throughout the universe. There was peace because all the members of God’s vast
family trusted each other. They trusted their heavenly Father, and He,
in turn, could safely trust in them. But then a war began in heaven, a conflict of distrust. An adversary leveled false charges against God, and God
began His long and patient demonstration of the truth. This conflict was
not over mere obedience to the rules, but over the very character and
government of God Himself. In this last chapter we explore the outcome
of that great conflict, what it means to be truly at peace with God. The
resolution of that conflict was and is costly, but the ultimate outcome
will be worth the cost.
Peace Cannot Be Established by Force
Victory for God is more than the destruction of His enemies. He
could have won that kind of victory very easily, by the exhibition of
almighty power. But such a victory would be sad, since God’s enemies
have been His own beloved and misbehaving children. What victory
would it be for God to destroy them? There will be no victory for God
unless what went wrong has been set right, and peace in His family has
been made eternally secure. God will not settle for a false peace based on
force or fear, He desires a real peace based on freely given love and trust.
How could He be satisfied with anything less from His children?
• • • • •
There will be no victory for God unless what went wrong
has been set right, and peace in His family has been made
eternally secure.
• • • • •
There could certainly be no peace if God were the kind of person
Satan has made Him out to be — arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. And yet there are explanations of salvation that seem
based on the assumption that Satan’s false picture of God is the truth.
For example, “God is arbitrary,” some will say, “but as Sovereign He has
the right to be.” “God takes vengeance,” others will say, “but for Him
we should call it justice.”
Few would dare say that God is unforgiving and severe, yet they
imply the same by urging the necessity of a friend up there to plead with
God to forgive and heal. If God is like that, the mere adjustment of our
legal standing would be like a presidential pardon. It would hardly bring
peace between God and His misbehaving children. While He might
choose to forgive under certain circumstances, peace with a God who is
arbitrary, vengeful, and severe would be little more than a ceasefire, a
temporary truce.
The Basis for Genuine Peace
Paul explained to early Christians that sinners can be restored to
genuine peace with God: “Therefore, since we are justified by faith, we
have peace [emphasis supplied] with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ.” Romans 5:1, RSV. According to this translation, peace is a
present and ongoing reality for those who have been set right by God.
But other versions translate the key phrase, “Let us have peace,” or
something similar. According to that reading, we have justification first
and then seek for peace afterwards as an additional blessing. Is that how
things work or does justification in and of itself bring peace?
• • • • •
God will not settle for a false peace based on force or fear,
He desires a real peace based on freely given love and
trust.
• • • • •
I like it when translators combine the best of both options, as in
“let us go on having peace.” Justification brings us peace. So let’s go on
having it. Such a reading is supported by Moffatt, “Let us enjoy the
peace we have.” And Montgomery renders it, “Let us continue to enjoy
the peace we have.” And Phillips translates it, “Let us grasp the fact that
we have peace.” That really combines the two, doesn’t it? Justification
does indeed bring peace, which indicates that it must be more than mere
pardon or the adjustment of our legal standing.
Have you ever wronged someone, been very generously forgiven,
and then been embarrassed to meet that person again? Would God want
us to avoid Him in the hereafter because He has been so forgiving?
Would we be uncomfortable in His presence, fearing that He might
bring up the subject of our sinful past? Mere pardon is no guarantee that
He won’t do that. But God not only forgives, He treats us as if we had
never sinned. He treats us as if we had always been His loyal children.
How do we know that to be true? Because of God’s promise
(Jeremiah 31:34)? But a promise is only a claim. Is there direct evidence
in Scripture that God not only forgives us, but treats us as if we had
always been His loyal children? Look how God spoke to Solomon about
his father David: “. . . walk before me in integrity of heart and uprightness, as David your father did.” 1 Kings 9:3–4, NIV. Integrity of heart?
Uprightness? Think of all the things that David did! And yet, because
David had been set right with God, and had been won back to trust, and
had received a new heart and a right spirit, God describes sinful David
as if he had always been His loyal son! He did it for David, and He is willing to do it for every one of us. Now that is the experience of justification!
Since that Latin term, justification, has come to have such a narrow,
legal connotation in theological circles, I suggest we use different English
terms such as “set right” or “put right” with God. Jesus came to bring
peace with God. Not by paying some legal penalty so God would not
have to kill us. Jesus brought peace with God by showing us the truth
about God; that there is no need to be afraid. God will indeed give up
those who refuse to trust Him, who turn down the truth, who are
unwilling to listen and unwilling to let Him heal them. And they will
die, not as a penalty, but as a consequence. God will not torture His
dying children to death.
What Genuine Peace Cost
Jesus also brought peace, not by assuring us that He would be our
friend in court, but by showing us there is no need for Him to plead with
the Father in our behalf, for the Father is just as much our friend. The
only way to set us right, keep us right, and restore us back to peace with
God, was for Jesus to demonstrate, at great cost, the truth about His
Father. As one of God’s best friends has expressed: “. . . the whole purpose of (Christ’s) own mission on earth (was) to set men right through
the revelation of God” (Ellen G. White, “God Made Manifest in Christ,”
Signs of the Times, January 20, 1890). This is the great truth that sets us
free. This is the truth that brings everlasting peace throughout the universe.
We know what it cost to demonstrate this truth. You may recall
Chapter Eight, “The Most Costly and Convincing Evidence,” the chapter about the meaning of Christ’s suffering and death. There we looked
at Colossians: “Through him God chose to reconcile the whole universe
to himself, making peace through the shedding of his blood upon the
cross.” Colossians 1:20, NEB. Christ died for the whole universe, even
for the loyal angels, to answer their questions.
The Extent of Peace Today
How successful has God been in restoring peace to His universe?
Does peace prevail in heaven? Read the whole book of Revelation. The
heavenly beings never cease to celebrate God’s victory in the Great
Controversy and how trustworthy and righteous He is. How about
peace in the hereafter? Read the marvelous descriptions of the peace to
come in Isaiah, many of the other prophetic books, and the last two
chapters in Revelation. In contrast, how successful has God been in
restoring peace on this earth? Evidently, not so much. Because many
have chosen to twist or even reject the truth, it has not produced peace
on earth. Instead, the truth has produced argument and debate — even
to the point of violence and persecution. But Jesus warned us this would
happen. He foresaw what His demonstration of the truth would cause:
I did not come to bring peace, but a sword. I came to set sons
against their fathers, daughters against their mothers, daughters-inlaw against their mothers-in-law; a man’s worst enemies will be the
members of his own family. Matthew 10:34–36, GNT.
Look at what the members of Jesus’ own family did to Him: “He
came to His home, and His own family did not welcome Him.” John
1:11, Goodspeed. In fact, they told Him that He must have had a devil to
describe His Father in that way (John 8:48). And they killed Him in
order to silence Him. We need to remember that the very ones who
rejected Christ, and preferred Satan’s picture of God, were the most
pious group of Sabbath-keeping, tithe-paying, health-reforming, Biblestudying “adventists” the world has ever known. Peter warns that those
who accept the true picture of God may expect similar treatment to that
which Christ experienced:
. . .do not be surprised at the painful test you are suffering. . . .
Rather be glad that you are sharing Christ’s sufferings. . . . Happy are
you if you are insulted because you are Christ’s followers; this means
that the glorious Spirit, the Spirit of God, is resting on you. 1 Peter
4:12–14, GNT.
Who today would bring such trouble to those who hold the true
picture of God? Could such trouble come again from the same sort of
pious, Sabbath-keeping, tithe-paying, health-reforming, Bible-quoting
“adventists” as before? It certainly could.
Wherever the Holy Spirit is received, however, He brings peace:
“The Spirit, on the other hand, brings a harvest of love, joy, peace . . . .”
Galatians 5:22, Weymouth. These are the fruits of the Spirit. But how
does the Holy Spirit bring peace? Does He bring peace by working on
our feelings, like a divine tranquilizer? Or does the Holy Spirit bring
peace by reminding us of the truth? Jesus explains this as follows:
. . .the Counselor, the Holy Spirit. . . will remind you of everything
I have said to you. Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. . . . Do
not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid. John 14:26–27,
NIV.
Then in John 15 and 16 He gave the reasons why, climaxing at the end
of John 16 and the beginning of John 17:
I have told you all this so that you may find peace in me. In the
world you will have trouble, but be brave; I have conquered the
world. . . . eternal life is this: to know you [ the Father], the only true
God. . . . I have glorified you on earth and finished the work that you
gave me to do. John 16:33; 17:3–4, Jerusalem.
When Jesus spoke about conquering the world, He meant winning
God’s case in the Great Controversy. Jesus’ work on earth was to reveal
the truth about His Father’s character. His mission was to show that
God is not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be.
Jesus provided costly truth and evidence that is the basis of our freedom
to make up our minds about God.
Peace Amidst the Struggle
Is it possible, however, to accept this truth, and be willing to give
up everything to have this peace, and yet still experience un-peaceful
struggling within ourselves? This troubles many. It troubled Paul and he
confesses that struggle in Romans 7, the whole chapter, but particularly
toward the end:
I see a different law at work in my body— a law that fights
against the law which my mind approves of. . . it makes me a prisoner. . . . What an unhappy man I am! Who will rescue me? Romans
7:23–24, GNT.
All of Romans 8, in fact, describes that rescue. The chapter begins by
Paul saying that God does not condemn His struggling children
(Romans 8:1). He is not only our Father, but our Divine Physician, and
He knows that the habits of a lifetime are not cured overnight. And so,
as we struggle, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are all on our side to help
us and to heal us. Notice what Paul says at the end of this chapter:
If God is for us, who can be against us?. . . I am certain that. . .
neither angels nor other heavenly rulers or powers. . .will ever be able
to separate us from the love of God. Romans 8:31, 38–39, GNT.
If, in fact, we need discipline to overcome bad habits and learn new
ones, God will give it to us. But when the discipline comes, we need to
understand that God is not angry with us. He is disciplining us because
He loves us. We will not allow the discipline to disturb our peace with
God. Hebrews 12:9–11 tells us that God disciplines those He loves like
a father disciplines his children. The author goes on to say: “No discipline seems pleasant at the time. . . . Later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace. . . .” Hebrews 12:11, NIV. In fact, if
we’ve been set right with God and we’ve been won back to love and
trust, God can even turn our trials and troubles to our advantage: “We
can be full of joy here and now even in our trials and troubles. These
very things will give us patient endurance; this in turn will develop a
mature character.” Romans 5:3–4, Phillips. The passage goes on to say
that a mature character produces a hope that will never let us down
(Romans 5:4). And that makes for great peace between us and our God.
Concluding Words
The picture of God we’ve been conversing about in this book is
very good news to some of us. But it is far from new news. It was pre-
sented centuries ago throughout the sixty-six books of Scripture, even in
Old Testament times: “You, Lord, give perfect peace to those who keep
their purpose firm and put their trust in you.” Isaiah 26:3, GNT. As far
back as the days of Isaiah, we are assured that if only we would trust our
God, we would have this perfect peace. According to Hebrews, this
good news has been presented as far back as the Exodus: “For we have
heard the Good News, just as they did. They heard the message, but it
did them no good, because when they heard it, they did not accept it
with faith.” Hebrews 4:2, GNT.
So the good news can be turned down. God’s chosen people in the
Promised Land, with whom prophet after prophet pleaded, were not, as
a whole, won back to trust by the evidence God presented. They did not
find this peace, this “Sabbath-like rest,” which is available to us when we
are won back to trust (Hebrews 4:9). This picture of God will do us no
good either if it does not win us back to trust and a willingness to listen
to our God.
So at the close of our twenty conversations, what position have you
taken in the great controversy over God’s character and government?
Can you agree that God is not the kind of person His enemies have made
Him out to be? That He is indeed an infinitely powerful, but an equally
gracious person, who values nothing higher than our freedom and our
peace, peace with God and with each other? Such peace is not produced
by force or fear. That is why God pleads with us gently, but also urgently, in the words of Paul, “Let everyone be fully persuaded in his own
mind” (Romans 14:5).
Questions and Answers
Louis Venden: I believe I hear you emphasizing that peace comes
through knowing the truth about God and knowing that Satan’s charges
against God are false. Satan’s charges against God have been summarized
in five words that you’ve used again and again: God is accused of being
arbitrary, exacting, vengeful, unforgiving, and severe. I’d like to address
these five terms one by one.
Why can’t God be arbitrary? Don’t we say that God is sovereign?
Didn’t God create the world? Can’t He run it any way He wants to?
Graham Maxwell: Absolutely, God is sovereign. It reminds me of
our earlier discussion regarding Romans 9, the potter and the clay. In the
larger, great controversy view, God is definitely sovereign. He created
this universe precisely as He wished it to be, and He runs it precisely as
He wishes to run it, and He always will. But the question that flows from
that is, how does God run the world? Is He arbitrary in His government? No, He values nothing higher than our freedom. If we want to say
that God is arbitrary about anything, He’s arbitrary about freedom. He
would rather give up everything than give up freedom. That’s how arbitrary He is on that.
Lou: I take it you’re comfortable with the word “sovereign,” as
long as His being sovereign still allows us to be free. If God were arbitrary, it would mean we are not free.
Graham: That’s right. God exercises His sovereignty in a way that
respects our freedom.
Lou: What about the seventh-day Sabbath? Isn’t it true “because
God chose a particular day and that’s all there is to it”?
• • • • •
God exercises His sovereignty in a way that respects our
freedom.
• • • • •
Graham: It might seem arbitrary on God’s part if all we had of the
fourth commandment was, “Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy”
(Exodus 20:8). But we have much more than that. The fourth commandment also refers us back to creation (Exodus 20:11). That means the seventh-day Sabbath reminds us of all the evidence about God that we find
there. The Sabbath is a reminder that God respects us and values nothing higher than our freedom. It reminds us of the Exodus from Egypt,
and also the answers given during crucifixion week. There are so many
reasons for the seventh-day Sabbath, it can hardly be regarded as evidence of His arbitrariness. He gave us the Sabbath to remind us of all the
evidence that He is not arbitrary. So it seems to me almost perverse to
suggest that the Sabbath is an arbitrary test of our obedience. Just the
opposite! It’s a monument to His not being arbitrary.
Lou: All right. Let’s look at the accusation that God is exacting. I
think of that reference in the book of James where it says, “If you break
one of the Commandments you’re guilty of all” [emphasis supplied]
(James 2:10). That sounds rather exacting, doesn’t it?
Graham: Yes, until we stop and take a closer look at the Ten
Commandments. Until we look at Moses’ summary of the Ten
(Deuteronomy 6:4–5; Leviticus 19:18) repeated by Jesus (Matthew
22:36–40) and then by Paul (Romans 13:10). To love God with all our
heart and our neighbor as ourselves is the fulfilling of the law. It doesn’t
matter which one of the Ten you break. To break any one of the Ten is
to show that you are not a loving person. So it’s not about God being
exacting. It doesn’t matter which commandment you break. The Ten
Commandments, as we have them, are really an expansion on the one,
which is love (for God and for each other). Love cannot be commanded
anyway.
Lou: All right then. What about God being vengeful? I think about
the book of Hebrews. “Vengeance is Mine; I will repay” (Hebrews 10:30).
What about the destruction that takes place at the End, for example? I
think we’ve had more questions on this than on any other topic.
Graham: Well, since God says that, and He is clearly involved in
the destruction at the End and in many incidents throughout Scripture,
we have to look at all those stories very carefully. We need to ask ourselves the question, “When God exercises ‘vengeance,’ how does He do
it?” As we have covered earlier, it may be in a form of discipline, or it
may even result in Him winning people over rather than destroying
them. And when it comes to the final events you have mentioned, how
the wicked perish in the end is demonstrated by the cross.
Lou: What about the accusation that God is unforgiving? Consider
Adam and Eve. It is their very first offense, and they have to leave their
garden home. Why couldn’t God have been the way Jesus said we ought
to be, forgiving “seventy times seven”? Matthew 18:21–22. Why couldn’t He have just said, “Well, you’ve made one mistake, that’s your first,
we’ll overlook that”?
Graham: If sin were merely breaking the rules, if sin were merely a
legal matter, He could have forgiven and let it go. In fact, I believe He
did forgive Adam and Eve. He treated them like the father of the prodigal treated his son. The father forgave him even as he left home. He
regarded him with forgiveness even as he wallowed in the pigpen. The
problem with a focus only on forgiveness is that sin changes people.
Forgiveness does no good in the long run unless one responds.
Forgiveness by itself doesn’t heal the damage done by sin. It is not that
God is unforgiving, but that, having sinned, we are changed. And what
is needed is not so much forgiveness as healing the damage done. So I
would say that of course God forgave Adam and Eve. But that was not
all they needed.
Lou: We’re back to that crucial point that you made rather early on;
it matters how we understand what went wrong, the sin problem.
Graham: Sin is not so much a legal problem as a real problem. It
calls for healing and not just some kind of legal adjustment.
Lou: Back to Satan’s accusation that God is severe. I can hear someone saying, “Isn’t death too severe a punishment for not loving and
obeying?”
Graham: If death were a penalty, that would be incredibly severe.
But if it’s a consequence, that’s something else entirely. Death tells us
that sin is a very serious matter. It changes us. But unfortunately, we
often speak about death as an imposed sentence or penalty. That puts
God in a very severe light. Death is ultimately a consequence of sin and
not a penalty that God imposes on us.
Lou: In the book of Revelation, God is described as resurrecting
the wicked at the end of the Millennium (Revelation 20:5–6). Why does
God do this? They are wicked and rebellious. They are lost anyway.
Why not just leave them asleep? Isn’t it harsh to bring them back to life
only to let them burn up?
Graham: I imagine the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah arising
at the end of the Millennium (Revelation 20:5), looking around and saying, “Here we go again!” It seems cruel and inhumane to resurrect them,
doesn’t it? There has to be a purpose.
The word “millennium” means a thousand years. The Millennium
of Revelation begins with the Second Coming of Jesus and the resurrection of the righteous (Revelation 20:4–6). At that time Jesus takes the
righteous to heaven (John 14:1–3), while the wicked die and/or remain
in their graves. At the end of the thousand years is the third coming of
Jesus and the resurrection of the wicked.
Why would God resurrect the wicked after all that? What suffering
that would cause! How terrible to be in the New Jerusalem and see one’s
loved ones outside (Revelation 20:7–10). God would only do this if it said
something of very great importance that would contribute to our understanding and to the security of the universe. For example, we might
wonder why Uncle Bill is not in the Kingdom. Uncle Bill was the one
who said, “If you’d just prove it to me, I’d come in.” And you see Uncle
Bill out there. He is looking at the New Jerusalem. He sees Christ in His
human form at the apex of the city. Here’s all the evidence, plain to see,
and Uncle Bill is not moved one bit. In fact, Revelation goes on to say
that Satan moves among these rebels who have been resurrected and he
deceives them into marching against the New Jerusalem as if to destroy
Christ again (Revelation 20:8–9). And you will be able to say, “God,
your diagnosis was right. More time and more evidence would not have
done Uncle Bill any good.” The cause of his death is something much
more important than simply imposing a penalty for his refusal to believe.
Uncle Bill is simply not safe to save. God shows him all the evidence at
the end of the Millennium, and he still does not respond. You’ll weep
when you see it, but Uncle Bill will not respond. So these events will be
a final demonstration of the character of God and, by contrast, the characters of Satan and all who follow him.
Lou: What are the redeemed, those who are saved, doing during
this thousand-year period? That’s a long period of time.
Graham: I like to remember what Peter said: “With the Lord a
thousand years is like a day” (2 Peter 3:8). You could translate that “a millennium is like a day, and a day is like a millennium.” I don’t think we
need to worry about the time. I think that a thousand years with the
Lord will seem like a day. But there are important things that have to
happen during that time. The loyal angels will have had a chance before
the Second Coming to meet as a heavenly family and consider candidates
for the Kingdom. That way our future neighbors and friends can be satisfied that it’s safe to admit former rebels like us into eternity. But what
about us? We’ve not seen the evidence that they examined. I think during the Millennium those who have been adjudged safe to save will have
their opportunity to ask questions, to see the evidence, to find out why
their mother isn’t there. We would all find a loved one’s absence very
sad. But God will be fair about it, He will show us the evidence so we
can understand.
There’s something else that may need to happen during the
Millennium. We will be preparing ourselves to face that awful scene
when the wicked die in a fiery moment of destruction. We will have to
see that someday. Are we ready to see it and not become afraid of God?
Those of us who live to see Christ come, will have become so settled into
the truth that we can see the seven last plagues and not become afraid of
God. But think of all the babes in the truth who have been saved from
the foot of Mount Sinai through the centuries. Think of the thief on the
cross. Think of all the others who have not had time and evidence to
become confirmed in this.
Everyone must be ready for that awesome day when God says to
those inside the New Jerusalem, “Children, you know what’s coming
next. Do you want to come out to the wall and watch? Or do you want
to hide in the basement somewhere? I’m about to give My rebellious
children up, and untold numbers of them are going to die. And you
know why I’ve waited so long.” And so we stand, perhaps, and watch
our God, as fire comes down from heaven and the glory of Him who is
love consumes all that is out of harmony. And we will know that, as the
wicked die, God will be crying: “Why will you die? How can I give you
up? How can I let you go?” Hosea 11:8. He’s no more angry with them
than He was with His Son when He gave Him up in Gethsemane and on
Calvary.
When it’s all over, I can see God turning to us and saying, “How
awful that was. But children, I have one last question to ask you all.
Have I made you afraid? Because if I have, I’ve let it happen too soon,
and I would have waited longer.” But hopefully we will all be so settled
into the truth that we will be able to draw close and say to God, “It’s
all right, there was no other way.” And from then on there will be peace
forever, in spite of that awful end. Are we ready to see that and not be
made afraid? Because if it makes us afraid, then we’ll serve Him from
fear, and the obedience of fear produces the character of a rebel. If any
of us serves God out of fear after that, God will still have the seeds of sin
in His universe, and He will not have won the war. We would be back
where it all began.
Lou: At the end of the book of Revelation there’s that beautiful
statement, “God will wipe away all tears from their eyes” (Revelation
21:4). It just struck me as you were talking that maybe we will need to
wipe the tears even from God’s eyes.
Graham: Oh, I like that thought very much. As His children,
wouldn’t that be appropriate? To get a little closer and say, “It’s all
right, God. It’s all right.”
Lou: We have more questions in this area: “If God does not punish,
then who sends the fire down from heaven on the wicked?” Revelation
20:9. You’ve already alluded to that. Also, “Who caused Ananias and
Sapphira to fall dead?” Acts 5:1–11.
Graham: I would want to make a difference between two kinds of
death. What happened to Ananias and Sapphira is what the Bible calls
the first death, and they will be resurrected. Their future, in which resurrection they will arise, is between them and God. But what happened
to Ananias and Sapphira is different from this awful death at the end.
Now when fire comes down from God and consumes the resurrected
wicked (Revelation 20:9), God is there, no doubt about it. But as we have
discussed before, this “fire” is His life-giving glory which is described in
the Bible as having the appearance of fire (Ezekiel 1:26–27; Daniel 7:9–10;
Revelation 4:5). In fact, if we were among the saved, we would have been
living in this life-giving glory for a thousand years, and it won’t have
hurt anybody. It’s only if we’re willfully and rebelliously out of harmony with God that this glory is damaging. God in mercy has veiled this
life-giving glory for our sake. His so-called “strange act” (Isaiah 28:21) is
when He ceases to veil His life-giving glory. When this earth is no longer
a dark place, and His glory fills the earth, all that is out of harmony is consumed. He doesn’t turn His back on this. He’s there. He’s watching His
children. It’s His glory. But He’s not torturing His dying children to
death. That’s the difference.
Lou: You once told me that we will bask in that glory for all eternity. We will never want it to go out.
• • • • •
God in mercy has veiled His life-giving glory for our sakes.
His “strange act” (Isaiah 28:21) is when He ceases to veil
His life-giving glory. All that is out of harmony will then
be consumed. But He’s not torturing His dying children
to death.
• • • • •
Graham: Oh, I like the fact that this is everlasting fire. If the fire is
God’s glory, it had better not go out. We will live in this everlasting fire
for eternity, but it’s His life-giving glory.
Lou: Someone raised the same basic question about the Flood. “Are
you saying God doesn’t kill? What about the Flood?”
Graham: This is a similar question to the one about Ananias and
Sapphira. The deaths at the time of the Flood belong to the first death. I
see God bringing the Flood as an emergency measure, and a very serious
one at that. The Flood was a very risky thing for Him to do, lest we serve
Him from fear. And certainly the Flood didn’t win their hearts. The survivors built a tower to escape Him not long after (Genesis 11:1–9). But
He did it to preserve contact with the human race. Those who died in
the Flood died the first death. And all who died in the Flood will be resurrected.
Lou: A related question: “How do we explain that God in the Old
Testament told His people again and again to wipe out the enemy? Here
are God’s children being instructed by God to do this. How do you reconcile that with a loving God?”
Graham: That was truly an emergency measure. But before He did
that, He said to the children of Israel, “When I take you out of Egypt,
I’ll send My angel ahead of you. I’ll send hornets ahead of you. I’ll use
the forces of nature to remove your enemies one way or the other. Let
Me do it” (Exodus 23:23–30). But they didn’t trust Him on this, as with
so many other things He sought to do for them. And so He stooped and
met them where they were and helped them fight. But while He helped
them, He still hated the fighting. How do we know? When David wanted to build the temple, God said, “You’re a great man as a warrior, but
you’ve been a man of blood (1 Chronicles 28:3). That’s not My ideal,”
and He went on record as not wanting the fighting. He never designed
His people to fight their way into Canaan. But in their lack of faith, He
helped them fight.
• • • • •
We know who the accuser of the brethren is, the one who
accuses them day and night before God (Revelation 12:10).
But we have sometimes made God the one who is against
us.
• • • • •
Lou: Here’s another question. “God has the power to take away
our eternal life. But does He have the right to take away our life on this
earth?” I think this question is talking about the first death that you
referred to. Why should or would God ever want to interrupt our pursuit of happiness?
Graham: There are two things to consider there. Who determines
what God’s rights are? As Sovereign, He’s going to do precisely as He
wishes to. We don’t give Him His rights. However, the kind of sovereign He is, He does want His children to see Him as doing what is right.
That is a great concern to Him. Does He have a right to intervene? I
would say, if God had not intervened, we would have destroyed each
other long ago. It isn’t a matter of whether He has a right to interfere
with my pursuit of happiness; had He not intervened, there wouldn’t be
any of us left to pursue happiness. The consequences of our own choices
would long ago have destroyed us. So I’m glad He has intervened. He
didn’t do it to deprive us of our freedom; He did it to preserve our freedom. But He has had to take emergency measures to do that.
Lou: This question touches on something you referred to in the
first part of the chapter. There are texts (Romans 8:34; 1 Timothy 2:5;
Hebrews 7:25, etc.) which indicate that Christ intercedes with the
Father. So this questioner says: “Here are the texts. Christ intercedes for
us. Now, in what sense is that true?”
Graham: Well, we need to refer to the questions in Romans: “If
God be for us, who can be against us?” Romans 8:31. “Who can bring
any accusation?” Romans 8:33–34. But we have sometimes turned that
around and made God the one who is against us. We need to remind ourselves who the accuser of the brethren is, the one who accuses them day
and night before God (Revelation 12:10). Satan is the one who is against
us. And Christ does meet his charges through intercession, for the enemy
of God is our enemy, too.
There are times, though, where I think God has said: “I have given
you priestly intercession, even My Son in between, because I know how
scared you are of Me.” And so as an emergency measure He has sometimes spoken of Jesus coming in between. But we need to read John
16:26–27. Really, there is no need for anyone to intercede with the
Father, not even the Son, because the Father Himself loves us. So we
need to put all those passages together.
Lou: Our problem is making a distinction between Father and Son,
isn’t it? It is easy to think of Jesus as more kind and loving than the
Father.
Graham: How sad when people come to that conclusion. And yet,
if the Father sees us thinking the Son is kinder than He is, He’s not jealous of His Son. He just wants us to get the message. Many of us will
arrive in the Kingdom more comfortable with the Son than with the
Father. And I keep imagining what it would be like to arrive in the
Kingdom and say to the Son, “Thank You for begging the Father not to
kill us.” And things like that. And by and by He will say, “Look, it’s
time you met My Father.” So He will take us into the Father’s presence
and we will stand there, maybe looking at the floor in fear. And the Son
will say, “Look a little higher. Look into His face. What do you see?”
And we will see a face that is just as kind as the face of the Son. When
that time comes don’t say, “Father, thank You for letting the Son persuade You not to kill me.” He wouldn’t be angry about it, but He would
know you still need a little work. He will want us to grow up, but He
will be patient even then.
Lou: Let’s shift gears with this question: “If God knows what we
need, why do we have to pray in order to be provided with our needs?”
That touches on a previous chapter in this book (Chapter Fifteen—
“Talking to God as a Friend”).
Graham: Yes. God provides us with what we need whether we
pray or not (Matthew 5:45). That is what is so generous about Him. Does
that mean that we should not pray? Of course not. Prayer is “conversation with God as with a friend,” and He really is our friend, so we will
talk to Him about these things anyway. After all, prayer is more than
just begging Him for today’s groceries.
Lou: That’s right, that isn’t the way we treat our wives or our
friends, talking with them only when we need something! Here’s another interesting question: “Should we pray to the Holy Spirit?”
Graham: I think that would be most appropriate. Father, Son and
Holy Spirit — all three are co-equally, co-eternally God. However, I
think there’s special historical meaning in praying to the Father in the
name of the Son. It is the Son who revealed the truth about the Father
with the help and inspiration of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit also
helps us, because we don’t know how to pray as we should. He reminds
us of God’s whole way of winning us back to the truth. So what I like
to do is pray to the Father in the name of the Son, in grateful recognition for what He’s done, but with the help of the Holy Spirit.
Lou: I guess we don’t have to worry about the Holy Spirit getting
His feelings hurt.
Graham: The members of the Godhead go out of Their way to
honor each other.
Lou: You referred to the struggle that Romans 7 describes. What is
this struggle? When is it? Is it before conversion, or is it after conversion?
Graham: Let me summarize what Paul says there: “The good that I
would do, I don’t do; and all the evil that I don’t want to do, is what I
do. I delight in the law of God in my inner man, but in my body I feel
captive to the law of sin” (based on Romans 7:19–23). People say, “That
couldn’t be a converted person.” And yet if he delights in the law of
God, he sounds like a converted person. If you are struggling before conversion, if you are struggling during conversion, if you are struggling
after conversion, if you are ever struggling, then look to Jesus Christ. It
doesn’t really matter. It’s unnecessary to squabble about when the
struggle occurs. Struggle is also mentioned in Romans 8, which all interpreters recognize as applying after conversion (Romans 8:18–25).
Whenever you are struggling; before, during, or after conversion, be
thankful to God for Jesus Christ our Lord.
Lou: Since we are talking about peace, it seems to me that human
beings often live with a sense of guilt. Guilty people are surely not at
peace with God. What is God’s remedy for guilt?
Graham: What worries so many people about guilt is the fear that
goes with it. “I just got caught with my hand in the cookie jar, what is
He going to do to me?” There is a lot of fear mixed in there. There is
also a loss of dignity and self-worth. The woman taken in adultery felt
very guilty and very ashamed. And the first thing Jesus did was to
restore her dignity and self-respect. He did that time after time. How
can we act with dignity, as people created in God’s image, if we have
had our self-respect destroyed? Often, the chronic torture of unnecessary guilt is one of the negative consequences of the legal model.
In the great controversy model, the emphasis is on the truth about
God. How does God regard His child who is in trouble? Look at the
prodigal son. The father says, “Don’t even finish your speech of repentance. Come home and get a shower and put on the best clothes I can
give you. I’ll even give you back your ring of authority” [access to his
father’s bank accounts]. By so doing the father endeavored to give him
back his self-respect. And the son said, “But I am guilty; look what I
have done!” And the father said, “Look, I’m willing to forget it if you
will (Luke 15:17–22).”
• • • • •
The real remedy for the anguish of guilt is the truth about
God. The remedy for guilt is to know what God is like.
• • • • •
Who was the one who wanted to rub the son’s nose in his misdeeds from time to time? The pious older brother, of course. But as far
as God is concerned, He’s our physician, He doesn’t want to talk about
guilt. He doesn’t even want to dwell long on forgiveness. He says, “Son,
you’re My patient; you’ve come home; you trust Me. Let’s not waste
any time on the past. Let’s work from here on. I want to make you well.
And if you’re depressed about what you’ve done, it’s going to retard
your healing. So please forget about it the way I have.” The real remedy
for the anguish of guilt is the truth about God. The remedy for guilt is
to know what God is like.
Lou: All right. We know what God gave up to have peace in His
universe, but I guess I’d like to close with this question, What is it that
we have to give up to really have peace?
Graham: There is a sense in which we don’t have to give up a
thing. The gospel is about God not about us. Yet, at another level, there
are things we have to give up or they will get in the way of what God
wants to do for us. We need to co-operate with the Great Physician. So
we do have to give up prejudice, bias, and fixed opinions. We do have to
give up our unwillingness to listen, a self-satisfied stubbornness that
there can be no new ideas. We do have to be willing to investigate the
evidence. But in the end, we don’t give up a thing. The great good news
about God is His gift to us. And I wonder sometimes how anybody
could turn it down.
Think how the Son of God was the most skillful and persuasive
teacher of the truth there will ever be, God Himself in human form. And
He came to a very pious people who had bought into the Devil’s picture
of God. Driven by that understanding of God, they were doing many of
the right things, but for the wrong reasons. They were moved by law
and by fear. And in most cases, Jesus couldn’t change their minds. But
He did change a few minds, the very ones who gave us the marvelous
picture of God we find in the New Testament.
Perhaps even today we have “dear idiots” scattered all over the
planet, like the “dear idiots” of Galatia, who seemed to have a spell cast
over them. Galatians 3:1, Phillips. We must realize the Devil is our foe.
He does not want us to see the truth. He does not want the Great
Physician to heal us. He does not want us to become friends of God. But
the good news about God is too good to turn down. It is everything that
the old English word “gospel” implies. What good news!
Lou: Someone once said, “The Gospel we preach must be the
Gospel by which our own souls are saved.” As we draw this book to a
close, could you summarize your understanding of that gospel one last
time?
Graham: For me, the heart of the gospel is this. God is not the kind
of person His enemies have made Him out to be: arbitrary, unforgiving
and severe. Jesus said, “If you have seen Me, you have seen the Father”
(John 14:9). God is just as loving and trustworthy as His Son, just as
willing to forgive and to heal. Though infinite in majesty and power, our
Creator is an equally gracious person who values nothing higher than
the freedom, dignity, and individuality of His intelligent creatures. He
desires that their love, their faith, their willingness to listen and obey,
may be freely given. He even prefers to regard us not as servants but as
friends. This is the truth revealed through all the books of Scripture.
This is the everlasting good news that wins the trust and admiration of
God’s loyal children throughout the universe.
The Author
Graham Maxwell served as emeritus professor of New Testament at
Loma Linda University for nearly three decades. He was born in
England, attended college in California, and earned his Ph.D. in Biblical
studies, New Testament, from the University of Chicago Divinity
School.
His dissertation dealt with the elements of interpretation that have
entered into the translation of the New Testament, especially the book
of Romans. Romans continued to be a subject of his research and writing
for many years. Other publications include I Want to Be Free, You Can
Trust the Bible: Why, After Many Translations, It Is Still the Word of
God, Can God Be Trusted?, Be Careful Who You Trust!, and Servants or
Friends? Another Look at God.
For nineteen years he taught Bible and biblical languages to college
and ministerial students at Pacific Union College. In 1961 he moved to
Loma Linda to serve as director of the division of religion and teach Bible
to medical, dental, and other professional students.
His favorite course was a year-long trip through the whole Bible to
discover the picture of God in each of the sixty-six books. He taught this
course over 135 times, not only in the classroom, but in churches and
homes, to groups ranging in size from a dozen to 700.
People in 118 different countries have shared in this book by book
study of the Bible with the help of recordings. But as one man wrote
from the Falkland Islands, “I want you to know that I always read the
book in the Bible before I listen to those recordings.”
Maxwell watched the effect of such Bible study on over 10,000 people. “Something seems to happen,” he said, “when people of all cultures
discover in the Bible a consistent picture of God — an infinitely powerful
but equally gracious Person, who values nothing higher than their freedom and friendship.” That’s what led to the writing of his books.
Maxwell taught a weekly Bible class of 250 members for nearly 50
years that was recorded and sent to over 1,000 addresses around the
world.
Graham and Rosalyn, the girl he met in college, were married for
67 years. They had three daughters, seven grandchildren, and ten greatgrandchildren.
The Editor
Jon Paulien is Professor of Religion and Director of the Center for
Understanding World Religions at Loma Linda University. Formerly
(2007–2019) he was Dean of the School of Religion. He is the author of
over 30 books and more than two hundred articles, scholarly papers
(Society of Biblical Literature, Chicago Society for Biblical Research,
and others) and other publications. Jon is a specialist in the study of the
Johannine literature in the New Testament (Gospel of John and Book of
Revelation) and the intersection of faith with contemporary culture. He
also takes special delight in seminars and presentations to non-specialists
who can make practical use of the material in the real world. When not
at work, Jon enjoys being with his wife Pamella and their three children
and two grandchildren. He also enjoys travel, golf and photography
when time permits.
The Moderator
Louis Venden graduated from La Sierra College in 1951, married
Marjorie Lewis of Glendale, California two days later, and they began
their ministry in Northern California right after the honeymoon. They
have served in pastoral, evangelistic and teaching ministries: teaching at
Japan Missionary College, the SDA Theological Seminary, La Sierra
University, Pacific Union College and Loma Linda University’s School
of Religion. They pastored churches in Northern California, the
Mountain View Church in Central California, the University Church
in Loma Linda and the Pacific Union College Church.
While at the University Church in 1984, Lou had the opportunity
to participate with Graham Maxwell in the extended series of videotaped presentations (Conversations About God) that formed the basis for
this book.
His graduate studies have included an MA at Potomac University,
an MDiv from the SDA Theological Seminary and a Ph.D. from
Princeton Theological Seminary.
Lou and Marjorie returned to Southern California in August of
1996 where Lou served as Professor of Theology & Ministry with Loma
Linda University’s School of Religion and was appointed Emeritus
Professor of Religion in July, 2003.
The Vendens have three daughters: Elizabeth Sutherland of Loma
Linda, California; Susan Barrow of Woodinville, Washington; and
Barbara Venden of Montrose, California. They are also the immensely
pleased grandparents of Amy and Michael Sutherland and Jacob
Charles and Henry Thomas Barrow.
Following are Lou’s remembrances of Graham and the filming of
Conversations About God in 1984.
As I Remember
Lou Venden – August 2013
I remember my dear friend, Graham Maxwell, and his family. These
memories cover many years and include a host of times, places and
events. They are a treasured part of Marjorie’s and my pilgrim journey.
But the publication of this very significant volume takes me back
especially to 1984 – to twenty Friday evenings from January to June of
that year. I had the privilege of being part of the series titled
Conversations About God.
Graham sat on the platform in a comfortable chair by a table with a
lamp and simply “talked to us.” He shared out of a lifetime of commitment to “speak well and truly of our heavenly Father.” He drew upon all
sixty-six books in the biblical library and called us to keep our eyes on
the One who said, “If you have seen Me, you have seen the Father”
(John 14:9).
After his presentation of the evening’s topic he invited me to come
up and take the other chair by the table. We’d dialogue some, and then
I’d introduce questions from the congregation. At our first session we
drew upon queries he’d encountered earlier, but after that our audience
really got into it with their written questions and comments.
During this series, as you can understand, we got together often to
pray, then reflect on what had happened in the earlier meetings and consider the congregation’s vigorous participation. It was a setting in which
we also got to know each other well and became very good friends. We
were each involved in many other things, but oh how I appreciated this
special fellowship and planning time. I really enjoyed being with him!
I’m sure Graham would want to join me in paying a hearty tribute
to a beloved band of sisters and brothers who gave themselves unsparingly to help make this series possible. I am awed by what I personally know
of all they did to make it happen. The memory of their spirit, their
unflagging zeal and sense of mission still warms my heart.
He would also want to say a big “thank you” to every person who
attended these Friday evening gatherings. Their presence, interest and
active involvement was so vital and encouraging.
Graham devoted his life to helping us know the “truth about God.”
Beginning with the conflict in God’s family he helps us understand what
went wrong and what God is doing to make things right. He challenges
us to be sure about who is telling the truth – about who we believe and
trust, and why. My hope is that his message through this volume will be
Spirit blessed in spreading the everlasting Good News and leading us all
into an ever deepening friendship with God.
Someone has said, “The Gospel we preach must be the Gospel by
which our own souls are saved.” I’d like to bear witness to the truth that
Graham spoke well about our heavenly Father. But just as important,
whether in sunshine and shadows, on the mountain-top or in dark valleys, he lived a life anchored in God’s trustworthiness.
Dear Graham, in that glad morning of the resurrection I believe
you’ll hear His commendation, “You have said of Me what is right” (Job
42:7).
Conversations About God
BIBLE REFERENCE SHEETS
Chapter One
The Conflict In God’s Family
Another look at the biblical basis for understanding the plan of
salvation as God’s provision for restoring peace in His universe.
The Bible speaks of a war that began at the very center of God’s family, and
all of us have been caught up in the consequences of this revolt. The future of
God’s family depends upon the outcome of this war, upon God’s successful resolution of the crisis of distrust. The Good News is that God has already won
the war!
Bible passages included:
Revelation 12:7–12. “Then war broke out in heaven. Michael and his angels
fought against the dragon, who fought back with his angels; but the dragon was
defeated, and he and his angels were not allowed to stay in heaven any longer.
The huge dragon was thrown out — that ancient serpent, named the Devil, or
Satan, that deceived the whole world. He was thrown down to earth, and all
his angels with him.”
“Then I heard a loud voice in heaven saying, ‘Now God’s salvation has
come! Now God has shown his power as King! Now his Messiah has shown
his authority! For the one who stood before our God and accused our brothers
day and night has been thrown out of heaven. Our brothers won the victory
over him by the blood of the Lamb and by the truth which they proclaimed;
and they were willing to give up their lives and die. And so be glad, you heavens, and all you that live there! But how terrible for the earth and the sea! For
the Devil has come down to you, and he is filled with rage, because he knows
that he has only a little time left.’” GNT.
Isaiah 14:12–14. “How you are fallen from heaven, O Day Star, son of
Dawn! How you are cut down to the ground, you who laid the nations low!
You said in your heart, ‘I will ascend to heaven; above the stars of God I will
set my throne on high; I will sit on the mount of assembly in the far north; I
will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will make myself like the Most
High.’” RSV.
Matthew 4:8–11. “Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain, and
showed him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them; and he said
to him, ‘All these I will give you, if you will fall down and worship me.’ Then
Jesus said to him, ‘Begone, Satan! for [sic] it is written, “You shall worship the
Lord your God and him only shall you serve.”’ Then the devil left him, and
behold, angels came and ministered to him.” RSV.
Genesis 3:1–5. “Now the serpent was more subtle than any other wild creature that the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, ‘Did God say, “You
shall not eat of any tree of the garden”?’ And the woman said to the serpent,
‘We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but God said, “You shall not
eat of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you
touch it, lest you die.”’ But the serpent said to the woman, ‘You will not die.
For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will
be like God, knowing good and evil.’” RSV.
Colossians 1:19–20. “For in him all the fulness of God was pleased to dwell,
and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross.” RSV.
“For it was by God’s own decision that the Son has in himself the full nature
of God. Through the Son, then, God decided to bring the whole universe back
to himself. God made peace through his Son’s sacrificial death on the cross and
so brought back to himself all things, both on earth and in heaven.” GNT.
Ephesians 1:9–10. “For he has made known to us in all wisdom and insight
the mystery of his will, according to his purpose which he set forth in Christ
as a plan for the fulness of time, to unite all things in him, things in heaven and
things on earth.” RSV.
Ephesians 3:9–10. “. . . and to make all men see what is the plan of the mystery hidden for ages in God who created all things; that through the church the
manifold wisdom of God might now be made known to the principalities and
powers in the heavenly places.” RSV.
1 Corinthians 4:9. “. . . we have become a spectacle to the world, to angels
and to men.” RSV.
John 12:32. “When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone to
me.” GNT.
Other passages that speak of Satan and his angels:
Job 1 and 2; Zechariah 3:1–2; Matthew 25:41; 2 Corinthians 11:14; 1 Peter
5:8; Jude 1:6.
Chapter Two
What Went Wrong in God’s Universe
Another look at sin and its consequences in the larger setting of
the Great Controversy.
The Bible describes sin as more than mere breaking of the rules. Sin involves
a breakdown of trust and trustworthiness, a stubborn and suspicious unwillingness to listen. Left untreated, sin makes peace impossible. To set and keep things
right, trust must somehow be restored. God sent His Son to “deal with sin.”
Bible passages included*:
1 John 3:4. “Everyone who commits sin commits lawlessness; sin is lawlessness.” Williams.
James 4:17. “Whoever knows what is right to do and fails to do it, for him
it is sin.” RSV.
Romans 14:23. “Any action that is not based on faith is a sin.” Moffat.
“Whatever does not proceed from faith is sin.” RSV.
“When we act apart from our faith we sin.” Phillips.
Ezra 10:2. “We have broken faith with our God.” RSV.
“We have been unfaithful to our God.” NIV.
Numbers 20:12. “Because you did not trust in me enough to honor me as
holy in the sight of the Israelites, you will not bring this community into the
land I give them.” NIV.
Romans 3:10–18. “As the Scriptures say: ‘There is no one who is righteous,
no one who is wise or who worships God. All have turned away from God; they
have all gone wrong; no one does what is right, not even one. Their words are
full of deadly deceit; wicked lies roll off their tongues, and dangerous threats,
like snake’s poison, from their lips; their speech is filled with bitter curses.
They are quick to hurt and kill; they leave ruin and destruction wherever they
go. They have not known the path of peace, nor have they learned reverence for
God.’” GNT.
Romans 1:21–23, 28–32. “They know God, but they do not give him the
honor that belongs to him, nor do they thank him. Instead, their thoughts have
become complete nonsense, and their empty minds are filled with darkness.
They say they are wise, but they are fools; instead of worshiping the immortal
God, they worship images made to look like mortal man or birds or animals or
reptiles. . . .”
“Because those people refuse to keep in mind the true knowledge about God,
he has given them over to corrupted minds, so that they do the things that they
should not do. They are filled with all kinds of wickedness, evil, greed, and
vice; they are full of jealousy, murder, fighting, deceit, and malice. They gossip
and speak evil of one another; they are hateful to God, insolent, proud, and
boastful; they think of more ways to do evil; they disobey their parents; they
have no conscience; they do not keep their promises, and they show no kindness
or pity for others. They know that God’s law says that people who live in this
way deserve death. Yet, not only do they continue to do these very things, but
they even approve of others who do them.” GNT.
Hosea 4:16–17. “Israel is as obstinate as a stubborn heifer. How can the
Lord feed them now like lambs in a broad meadow? Ephraim is wedded to idolatry, let him alone.” Phillips.
Hosea 5:4. “For their spirit is steeped in unfaithfulness and they know nothing of the Lord.” Phillips.
Hosea 4:1, 12. “There is no honesty nor compassion nor knowledge of God.
. . . My people! Asking advice from a piece of wood and consulting a staff for
instructions!” Phillips.
Romans 6:23. “Sin pays its servants: the wage is death.” Phillips.
“For sin pays its wage — death.” GNT.
James 1:14–15. “No, a man’s temptation is due to the pull of his own inward
desires, which greatly attract him. It is his own desire which conceives and
gives birth to sin. And sin when fully grown produces death — make no mistake about that, brothers of mine!” Phillips.
Romans 3:3–4. “What if some did not have faith? Will their lack of faith nullify God’s faithfulness? Not at all!” NIV.
Romans 8:3. “What the Law could not do . . . God did . . . by sending his own
Son . . . to do away with sin.” GNT.
“God dealt with sin by sending his own Son.” Jerusalem.
Romans 5:1. “Now that we have been put right with God through faith,
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” GNT.
* James 1:14–15 was inadvertently not included in the presentation on which
the book’s main text is based.
Chapter Three
All God Asks Is Trust
Another look at the meaning and necessity of faith, in the larger
setting of the Great Controversy.
There has been a breakdown of trust in God’s universe —even to the point
of war up in heaven and continuing misunderstanding and distrust on this planet. There can be no real and lasting peace in God’s family until mutual trust and
trustworthiness have been restored. No wonder all God asks is trust — even of
us damaged sinners. For if only we trusted Him enough to listen, He could readily heal the damage done. God can and will save all who trust Him.
Bible passages included:
Acts 16:30–31. “‘Sirs, what must I do to be saved?’ And they said, ‘Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.’” KJV.
“Put your trust in the Lord Jesus.” NEB.
“Have faith in the Lord Jesus.” Berkeley.
Hebrews 11:1. “Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence
of things not seen.” KJV.
“Now faith is the title-deed of things hoped for.” Montgomery.
“Now faith means that we are confident of what we hope for, convinced of
what we do not see.” Moffatt.
“Now faith is being sure of what we hope for and certain of what we do not
see.” NIV.
Hebrews 10:35–39. “Don’t throw away your trust now — it carries with it
a rich reward. Patient endurance is what you need if, after doing God’s will,
you are to receive what he has promised. For yet a very little while, He that
cometh shall come, and shall not tarry. But my righteous one shall live by faith;
and if he shrink back, my soul hath no pleasure in him. Surely we are not going
to be men who cower back and are lost, but men who maintain their faith for
the salvation of their souls!” Phillips.
John 17:3. “And this is eternal life, that they know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.” RSV.
Exodus 33:11, 17. “The Lord would speak to Moses face to face, as a man
speaks with his friend. . . . And the Lord said to Moses, ‘I will do the very thing
you have asked, because I am pleased with you and I know you by name.’”
NIV.
Romans 10:17. “So faith comes from what is heard, and what is heard comes
by the preaching of Christ.” RSV.
Psalm 51:6, 10, 16–17. “Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward being:
therefore teach me wisdom in my secret heart. . . . Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and put a new and right spirit within me. . . . For thou hast no delight in
sacrifice; were I to give a burnt offering, thou wouldst not be pleased. The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God,
thou wilt not despise.” RSV.
Hosea 6:6–7. “It is true love that I have wanted, not sacrifice; the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings. But they, like Adam, have broken
their agreement; again and again they have played me false.” Phillips.
John 3:3. “Jesus answered him, ‘Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is
born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of God.’” RSV.
James 2:14, 19, 21–23. “My brothers, what use is it for a man to say he has
faith when he does nothing to show it? Can that faith save him? . . . You have
faith enough to believe that there is one God. Excellent! The devils have faith
like that, and it makes them tremble. . . . Was it not by his action, in offering his
son Isaac upon the altar, that our father Abraham was justified? Surely you can
see that faith was at work in his actions, and that by these actions the integrity
of his faith was fully proved. Here was fulfilment of the words of Scripture:
‘Abraham put his faith in God, and that faith was counted to him as righteousness’; and elsewhere he is called ‘God’s friend.’” NEB.
Hebrews 11:31, 32, 39. “By faith the prostitute Rahab escaped the doom of
the unbelievers, because she had given the spies a kindly welcome. Need I say
more? Time is too short for me to tell the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson and
Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets. . . . These also, one and all, are
commemorated for their faith.” NEB.
Luke 23:42–43. “And he said, ‘Jesus, remember me when you come into
your kingly power.’ And he said to him . . . ‘you will be with me in Paradise.’”
RSV.
One way of describing faith:
Faith is a word we use to describe a relationship with God as with a Person
well known. The better we know Him the better the relationship may be.
Faith implies an attitude toward God of love, trust, and deepest admiration.
It means having enough confidence in God — based on the more than adequate
evidence revealed — to be willing to believe what He says, to accept what He
offers, and to do what He wishes — without reservation — for the rest of eternity. Anyone who has such faith would be perfectly safe to save. This is why
faith is the only requirement for heaven.
Faith also means that, like Abraham and Moses, we know God well enough
to reverently ask Him, “Why”?
Chapter Four
God’s Way of Restoring Trust
Another look at the only safe basis for faith, in the larger setting
of the conflict over God’s character and government.
To have peace once again in His universe, all God asks of us is trust. But He
does not expect us to trust Him as a stranger. Besides, He has been charged
with being unworthy of our faith. How has God answered such false accusation? Mere claims of trustworthiness prove nothing. Only by the demonstration of trustworthiness over a long period of time and under a great variety of
circumstances — especially difficult ones — can trust be reestablished and confirmed. The Bible is a record of just such a demonstration. This is God’s way of
restoring trust.
Bible passages included:
James 2:19. “Do you believe that there is only one God? Good! The demons
also believe — and tremble with fear.” GNT.
Revelation 12:12. “The Devil has come down to you, and he is filled with
rage, because he knows that he has only a little time left.” GNT.
Genesis 9:8, 11–13; 11:1, 3–4. “God said to Noah and his sons. . . . ‘I promise
that never again will all living things be destroyed by a flood. . . . As a sign of
this everlasting covenant which I am making with you and with all living
beings, I am putting my bow in the clouds. . . .’ At first, the people of the whole
world had only one language. . . . They said to one another. . . . ‘Now let’s build a
city with a tower that reaches the sky.’” GNT.
Deuteronomy 13:1–3. “If a prophet arises among you, or a dreamer of
dreams, and gives you a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder which he tells
you comes to pass, and if he says, ‘Let us go after other gods,’ which you have
not known, ‘and let us serve them,’ you shall not listen to the words of that
prophet or to that dreamer of dreams.” RSV.
1 Kings 13:15–18. “Then [the old prophet] said to him, ‘Come home with
me and eat bread.’ And [the man of God] said, ‘I may not return with you, or
go in with you; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with you in this place;
for it was said to me by the word of the Lord, “You shall neither eat bread nor
drink water there, nor return by the way that you came,”’ And he said to him,
‘I also am a prophet as you are, and an angel spoke to me by the word of the
Lord, saying, “Bring him back with you into your house that he may eat bread
and drink water.”’ But he lied to him.” RSV.
Luke 24:15–17, 27, 30–31. “While they were talking and discussing together, Jesus himself drew near and went with them. But their eyes were kept from
recognizing him. And he said to them, ‘What is this conversation which you are
holding with each other as you walk?’ And they stood still, looking sad. . . . And
beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the
scriptures the things concerning himself. . . .When he was at table with them, he
took the bread and blessed, and broke it, and gave it to them. And their eyes
were opened and they recognized him.” RSV.
Romans 10:11, 13–15, 17. “For the Scriptures tell us that no one who
believes in Christ will ever be disappointed. . . . Anyone who calls upon the
name of the Lord will be saved. But how shall they ask him to save them unless
they believe in him? And how can they believe in him if they have never heard
about him? And how can they hear about him unless someone tells them? . . .
How welcome are those who come preaching God’s Good News! . . . Faith
comes from listening to this Good News — the Good News about Christ.”
Living Bible.
Galatians 5:22. “But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith.” KJV.
2 Peter 1:20–21. “But first note this: no one can interpret any prophecy of
Scripture by himself. For it was not through any human whim that men prophesied of old; men they were, but, impelled by the Holy Spirit, they spoke the
words of God.” NEB.
“You must understand this in the first place, that no prophecy in Scripture
can be understood through one’s own powers, for no prophecy ever originated
in the human will, but under the influence of the holy Spirit men spoke for
God.” Goodspeed.
John 14:16–17, 26; 15:26; 16:13. “I will ask the Father, and he will give you
another Helper, who will stay with you for ever. He is the Spirit, who reveals
the truth about God. . . . The Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will
send in my name, will teach you everything and make you remember all that I
have told you. . . . The Helper will come — the Spirit, who reveals the truth
about God and who comes from the Father. I will send him to you from the
Father, and he will speak about me. . . . When, however, the Spirit comes, who
reveals the truth about God, he will lead you into all the truth.” GNT.
John 5:39. “You study the Scriptures, because you think that in them you
will find eternal life. And these very Scriptures speak about me!” GNT.
Hebrews 1:1–2. “In many and various ways God spoke of old to our fathers
by the prophets; but in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son. . . .” RSV.
Chapter Five
The Record of the Evidence
Another look at the Bible, in the larger setting of the great controversy over God’s character and government.
Without the Bible we would know nothing about this conflict in God’s family. Nor would we have the record of how He has demonstrated His trustworthiness by His infinitely skillful and gracious way of handling the revolt. But
can the Bible itself be trusted? Do we have the right collection of sixty-six
books? Have the words been accurately preserved? Can we trust the many
translations? And, most of all can we have confidence that we understand the
meaning?
Bible passages included:
2 Timothy 3:16. “All Scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching. . . .” RSV.
“Every inspired scripture has its use for teaching the truth. . . .” NEB.
2 Timothy 3:14–17. “But for your part, —stand by the truths you have
learned and are assured of. Remember from whom you learned them; remember
that from early childhood you have been familiar with the sacred writings
which have power to make you wise and lead you to salvation through faith in
Christ Jesus. Every inspired scripture has its use for teaching the truth and
refuting error, or for reformation of manners and discipline in right living, so
that the man who belongs to God may be efficient and equipped for good work
of every kind.” NEB.
Luke 24:44. “Everything written about me in the law of Moses and the
prophets and the psalms must be fulfilled.” RSV.
Matthew 5:17–18. “Think not that I have come to abolish the law and the
prophets; I have come not to abolish them but to fulfil them. For truly, I say to
you, till heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the
law until all is accomplished.” RSV.
John 10:34. “Jesus answered them, ‘Is it not written in your law, “I said,
you are gods?”’” RSV. (Quoted from Psalms 82:6.)
John 10:34–35. “Jesus answered. . . . We know that what the scripture says is
true forever.” GNT.
Isaiah 8:19–20. “When men tell you to consult mediums and spiritists, who
whisper and mutter, should not a people inquire of their God? Why consult the
dead on behalf of the living? To the law and to the testimony! If they do not
speak according to this word, they have no light of dawn.” NIV.
Zechariah 7:12. “They made their hearts as hard as flint and would not listen to the law or to the words that the Lord Almighty had sent by his Spirit
through the earlier prophets.” NIV.
The Law: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy.
Prophets: Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hosea,
Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai,
Zechariah, Malachi.
The Writings: Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Song of Solomon, Ruth,
Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Chronicles.
The Old Testament Apocrypha: I and II Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Additions
to Esther, Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Susanna, Song of the
Three Children, Bel and the Dragon, Prayer of Manasseh, I and II Maccabees.
Some books of the Old Testament Pseudepigrapha: Testament of Adam,
Book of Jubilees, Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, Testament of Job, Book
of Enoch, Sibylline Oracles, Assumption of Moses, Ascension of Isaiah, Psalms
of Solomon, Magical Books of Moses, Story of Ahikar.
Some books of the New Testament Apocrypha: Gospel of Thomas, Book
of James, Assumption of the Virgin, Acts of John, Acts of Paul, Acts of Peter,
Letters of Christ and Abgarus, Letter of Lentulus, Apocalypse of Peter,
Apocalypse of Paul.
How would you read the phrase,
GODISNOWEHERE?
One competent scholar’s opinion as to the preservation of the
Bible:
“The Christian can take the whole Bible in his hand and say without fear or
hesitation that he holds in it the true Word of God, handed down without
essential loss from generation to generation throughout the centuries” (Frederic
Kenyon, one-time curator of the British Museum).
Yes, for all practical purposes we have in our possession the books of the
Bible as they were originally written.
Chapter Six
Evaluating the Evidence
Another look at understanding the Bible, in the larger setting of
the great controversy over God’s character and government.
The Bible is no mere collection of theological statements. Nor is it a code
book of deeds to be done and sins to be shunned. It is rather an inspired record
of God’s handling of the crisis of distrust in His universe. To be confident that
we see the real meaning, we must view the Bible as a whole, relating all its
parts to the one central theme — the truth about God Himself. Of every story,
teaching and event the same question must be raised: What does this say about
God? Another question naturally follows: Can we trust the God that we see?
Bible passages included:
Habakkuk 2:7. “Thou shalt be for booties unto them.” KJV.
Job 41:18. “By his neesings a light doth shine. . . .” KJV.
Exodus 28:11. “Ouches of gold.” KJV.
Luke 17:9. “I trow not.” KJV.
Romans 1:13. “Oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto,). . .” KJV.
1 Thessalonians 4:15. “We which are alive and remain unto the coming of
the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.” KJV.
John 20:17. “Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended
to my Father.” KJV.
John 2:4. “Jesus saith unto her, Woman what have I to do with thee?” KJV.
Matthew 11:4–6. “Jesus gave them this reply, ‘Go and tell John what you
hear and see — that blind men are recovering their sight, cripples are walking,
lepers being healed, the deaf hearing, the dead being raised to life and the good
news is being given to those in need. And happy is the man who never loses
his faith in me.’” Phillips. (See Isaiah 35 and 61.)
Hebrews 1:1–3. “In the past God spoke to our forefathers through the
prophets at many times and in various ways, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son. . . . The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact
representation of his being. . . .” NIV.
John 5:39–40. “You diligently study the Scriptures because you think that
by them you possess eternal life. These are the Scriptures that testify about me,
yet you refuse to come to me to have life.” NIV.
Luke 24:27. “And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, he explained
to them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.” NIV.
John 14:8–9. “Philip said, ‘Lord, show us the Father and that will be enough
for us.’ Jesus answered: ‘Don’t you know me, Philip, even after I have been
among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father.’”
NIV.
John 16:26–27. “I do not promise to intercede with the Father for you, for
the Father loves you himself. . . .” Goodspeed.
1 Corinthians 10:4. “They all drank from the supernatural rock that accompanied their travels — and that rock was Christ.” NEB.
Matthew 19:7–8. “The Pharisees asked him, ‘Why, then, did Moses give
the law for a man to hand his wife a divorce notice and send her away?’ Jesus
answered, ‘Moses gave you permission to divorce your wives because you are
so hard to teach. But it was not like that at the time of creation.’”GNT.
A statement of the purpose and method of Bible study.
The great purpose of the Bible is to reveal the truth about our heavenly
Father that we may be won back to Him in love and trust. This truth, this everlasting good news, is to be found in every one of the sixty-six books. But to discover this truth we must learn more than just what happened to Samson and
Delilah, to David and Bathsheba, to Gideon and his fleece. The all-important
question is, What do these stories tell us about God?
If one does not ask this question, much of the content of Scripture may seem
unrelated to the plan of salvation, even perplexing, sometimes even contradictory. But when one learns to view the Bible as a whole, there emerges a consistent picture of an all-wise and gracious God who seems willing to go to any
length to keep in touch with His people, to stoop and reach them where they
are, to speak a language they can understand. And the further one reads on,
book by book, the more one is moved with love and admiration for a God who
would be willing to run such risk, to pay such a price, in order to keep open the
lines of communication between Himself and His wayward children.
God will save all who trust Him. But He has not asked us to trust Him as a
stranger. The Bible — all of it — is a record of God’s revelation and demonstration of infinite trustworthiness.
Chapter Seven
The Question of Authority
Another look at God’s way of exercising authority—in the larger
setting of the great controversy over His character and government.
Our heavenly Father has been accused of the arbitrary and selfish abuse of
divine authority and power. If true, it would not be safe to trust Him. But the
whole Bible presents a refutation of this charge — not in mere claims but with
the evidence of demonstration. Even Paul once misunderstood God’s use of
power — then changed his mind on the Damascus road. Later he urged us not
to be so easily swayed by every “wind of doctrine” but to practice being more
discerning. Ephesians 4:14, Hebrews 5:14.
Many still labor under Paul’s earlier misunderstanding, and we are surrounded by conflicting claims to religious authority based on position, power,
miracle, or claimed communication from the Lord. How can we practice being
more discerning?
Bible passages included:
Matthew 24:23–24. “If anyone says to you then, ‘Look, here is Christ!’ or
‘There he is!’ don’t believe it. False christs and false prophets are going to
appear and will produce great signs and wonders to mislead, if it were possible,
even God’s own people!” Phillips.
Matthew 24:4–5. “Jesus answered, ‘Watch out, and do not let anyone fool
you. Many men, claiming to speak for me, will come and say, “I am the
Messiah!” and they will fool many people.’” GNT.
Revelation 13:13–14. “This second beast performed great miracles; it made
fire come down out of heaven to earth in the sight of everyone. And it
deceived all the people living on earth by means of the miracles which it was
allowed to perform. . . .” GNT.
2 Thessalonians 2:9–10. “The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with the work of Satan displayed in all kinds of counterfeit miracles,
signs and wonders, and in every sort of evil that deceives those who are perishing. They perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.” NIV.
2 Corinthians 11:13–15. “God’s messengers? They are counterfeits of the
real thing, dishonest practitioners masquerading as the messengers of Christ.
Nor do their tactics surprise me when I consider how Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light. It is only to be expected that his agents shall have the
appearance of ministers of righteousness. . . . . Phillips.
John 8:44–45. “The father whose sons you are is the devil, and you are bent
on carrying out the wishes of your father. He proved himself a murderer at the
very beginning, and did not loyally stand by the truth; in fact, there is no spark
of truth in him. Whenever he gives utterance to his falsehood, then he gives
expression to his real character; for he is a liar and the father of lies. I, on the
contrary, speak the truth, and therefore you do not believe me.” Kleist and
Lilly.
2 Thessalonians 2:1–3. “We ask you, brothers, not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by some prophecy, report or letter supposed to have come from
us. . . . Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way. . . .” NIV.
1 John 4:1–2. “My dear friends, do not believe all who claim to have the
Spirit, but test them to find out if the spirit they have comes from God. For
many false prophets have gone out everywhere.” GNT.
1 Thessalonians 5:21. “Test everything. Hold on to the good.” NIV.
Matthew 7:28–29. “When Jesus had finished saying these things, the
crowds were amazed at his teaching, because he taught as one who had authority. . . .” NIV.
Luke 4:32. “His message had authority.” NIV.
Deuteronomy 13:1–3. (Moses’ warning not to be misled by miracle-workers
who do not teach the truth.)
1 Kings 13:15–18. (The story of the lying prophet who claimed to speak for
God.)
Luke 24:15–17, 27, 30–31. (The Emmaus road story of how Jesus did not
reveal who He was until He had convinced the disciples first on the basis of evidence.)
One writer’s understanding of the Emmaus road experience:
“Jesus did not first reveal himself in his true character to them, and then
open the Scriptures to their minds. . . .he maintained his disguise till he had
interpreted the Scriptures, and had led them to an intelligent faith in his life,
his character, his mission to earth, and his death and resurrection. He wished
the truth to take firm root in their minds, not because it was supported by
his personal testimony, but because the typical law, and the prophets of the
Old Testament, agreeing with the facts of his life and death, presented unquestionable evidence of that truth. When the object of his labors with the two disciples was gained, he revealed himself to them.” E.G. White, Spirit of Prophecy,
vol. 3, 214 [emphasis supplied].
Chapter Eight
The Most Costly and Convincing Evidence
Another look at the cross—in the larger setting of the great controversy over God’s character and government.
In the second Conversation we considered again the Bible’s description of
sin as more than mere breaking of the rules. Sin involves a breakdown of trust
and trustworthiness, a stubborn and suspicious unwillingness to listen. Left
untreated, sin makes peace impossible. To set and keep things right, trust must
somehow be restored. God sent His Son “To deal with sin.” Why was it not
enough for Jesus simply to tell us the truth about His Father and to demonstrate by His own gracious treatment of the worst of sinners that God is not
the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be? Why did Jesus also
have to die? Why was there no other way?
The way Jesus suffered and died is the greatest revelation of the truth about
God the universe will ever see or ever need. Correctly understood it means
defeat for the accuser of our heavenly Father. No wonder Satan has sought to
obscure, even pervert, the meaning of the cross — to his own evil advantage
and to our great loss! But why did Jesus have to die?
Bible passages included:
Romans 6:23. “Sin pays its servants: the wage is death.” Phillips.
Genesis 3:4–5. “But the serpent said to the woman, ‘You will not die. For
God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be
like God. . . .’” RSV.
Romans 3:4. “As the Scripture says, ‘That you may be shown to be right in
what you say, and win your case when you go into court.’” Goodspeed.
Romans 3:25–26. “Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God; To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in
Jesus.” KJV.
“For God showed Him publicly dying as a means of reconciliation to be
taken advantage of by faith. This was to demonstrate God’s own righteousness, for in His divine forbearance He had apparently overlooked men’s former
sins. It was to demonstrate His righteousness at the present time, to show that
He Himself is righteous and that He sets right everyone who trusts in Jesus.”
Maxwell.
2 Corinthians 5:21. “For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin.”
RSV.
Romans 1:18, 24, 26, 28. “For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and wickedness of men who by their wickedness suppress the truth. . . . Therefore God gave them up. . . . For this reason God gave
them up. . . . And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them
up. . . .” RSV.
Romans 4:24–25. “. . . Jesus our Lord, who was put to death [given up] for
our trespasses.” RSV.
Hosea 11:7–8. “My people are bent on turning away from me — How, oh
how, can I give you up, Ephraim! How, oh how, can I hand you over, Israel!”
Phillips.
Matthew 27:46. “Jesus cried with a loud voice . . . ‘My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?’” RSV.
John 19:31. “Then the Jewish authorities asked Pilate to allow them to
break the legs of the men who had been crucified, and to take the bodies down
from the crosses. They requested this because it was Friday, and they did not
want the bodies to stay on the crosses on the Sabbath, since the coming Sabbath
was especially holy.” GNT.
2 Corinthians 5:19. “God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. . .
.” RSV.
Colossians 1:20. “. . . and through him to reconcile to himself all things,
whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross.” RSV.
John 12:32. “When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone to
me.” GNT.
1 Corinthians 1:17–18. “For Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach
the gospel, and not with eloquent wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied
of its power. For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but
to us who are being saved it is the power of God.” RSV.
Romans 1:16–17. “For I am not ashamed of the gospel: it is the power of God
for salvation to every one who has faith. . . . For in it the righteousness of God is
revealed.” RSV.
Jeremiah 9:24. “‘Let him who boasts boast about this: that he understands
and knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercises kindness, justice and righteousness on earth, for in these I delight,’ declares the Lord.” NIV.
Chapter Nine
There Is No Need to Be Afraid of God
Another look at freedom—in the larger setting of the great controversy over God’s character and government
To be afraid of our heavenly Father is to deny what He paid such a price to
reveal. Though infinite in majesty and power, God values nothing higher than
the freedom of His intelligent creatures, that their love and trust may be freely
given. He gave His life to make this eternally clear. Surely such a God is worthy of our deepest reverence and willingness to listen and obey.
If God were the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be — arbitrary, vengeful and severe — there could be no real freedom, and our worship
and obedience would be tarnished with our fears. Sadly millions have been
turned away from God by Satan’s perversion of the truth. But Jesus came to
bring the truth that sets us free, the truth about God that even makes it possible for us mere mortals to be His friends.
Bible passages included:
Revelation 14:7. “Fear God and give him glory, for the hour of his judgment
has come.” RSV.
Psalm 128:1–2. “Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord. . . . Happy shalt
thou be, and it shall be well with thee.” KJV.
Proverbs 9:10. “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” KJV.
“To be wise you must first have reverence for the Lord.” GNT.
Exodus 20:18–20. “The people were afraid and trembled; and they stood
afar off, and said to Moses, ‘You speak to us, and we will hear, but let not God
speak to us, lest we die.’ And Moses said to the people, ‘Do not fear; for God
has come to prove you, and that the fear of him may be before your eyes, that
you may not sin.’” RSV.
Hebrews 4:13. “There is nothing that can be hid from God; everything in
all creation is exposed and lies open before his eyes. And it is to him that we
must all give an account of ourselves.” GNT.
Ecclesiastes 12:14. “God is going to judge everything we do, whether good
or bad, even things done in secret.” GNT.
1 John 4:16–18. “God is love, and whoever lives in love lives in union with
God and God lives in union with him. Love is made perfect in us in order that
we may have courage on the Judgment Day. . . . There is no fear in love; perfect
love drives out all fear. So then, love has not been made perfect in anyone who
is afraid, because fear has to do with punishment.” GNT.
John 5:22. “The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the
Son.” RSV.
John 14:7, 9. “If you had known me, you would have known my Father
also. . . . He who has seen me has seen the Father.” RSV.
John 16:26–27. “I need make no promise to plead to the Father for you, for
the Father himself loves you. . . .” Phillips.
John 3:19. “And this is the judgment, that the light has come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light.” RSV.
John 12:47–48. “If any one hears my sayings and does not keep them, I do
not judge him. . . . He who rejects me and does not receive my sayings has a
judge; the word that I have spoken will be his judge on the last day.” RSV.
Romans 1:25, 28. “Because they exchanged the truth about God for a lie. . .
. God gave them up to a base mind and to improper conduct.” RSV.
Revelation 22:11. “Let him who does wrong continue to do wrong; let him
who is vile continue to be vile; let him who does right continue to do right; and
let him who is holy continue to be holy.” NIV.
Revelation 14:10–11. “He also shall drink the wine of God’s wrath. . . . and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone. . . . for ever and ever.” RSV.
Jude 1:7. “Sodom and Gomorrah . . . serve as an example by undergoing a punishment of eternal fire.” RSV.
Exodus 21:6. “He shall serve him for ever [emphasis supplied].” KJV.
Exodus 24:17. “Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a
devouring fire on the top of the mountain. . . .” RSV.
Hebrews 2:15. “. . . and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by
their fear of death.” NIV.
John 8:32. “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” GNT.
John 15:15. “No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know
what his master is doing; but I have called you friends, for all that I have heard
from my Father I have made known to you.” RSV.
Exodus 33:11. “Thus the Lord used to speak to Moses face to face, as a man
speaks to his friend.” RSV.
Chapter Ten
The Reminder of the Evidence
Another look at the Sabbath — in the larger setting of the great
controversy over God’s character and government.
If God values nothing higher than our freedom, why has He placed right in
the heart of the “royal law of liberty” (James) a command to remember the
Sabbath? Is this possibly one instance where God has imposed an arbitrary
requirement upon His people, just to show His authority and test their willingness to obey? But the whole message of Scripture is that there is no arbitrariness in our God. As Paul explained, God’s laws were given to help us, to
protect us in our ignorance and immaturity, to lead us back to trust.
Viewed in the larger setting of the great controversy over the character and
government of God, the Sabbath was “made for man” (Jesus) not before but
after sin entered the universe. Repeatedly in the sixty-six books the Sabbath
is connected with times of special demonstration of the truth about our God
— the perfection and freedom of creation week, the freeing of His people from
Egyptian bondage, the costly and convincing evidence of crucifixion week, the
promise of peace and freedom in the earth made new.
The Sabbath is a monument to freedom. It sums up the good news about
God. It reminds us of the everlasting truth that “sets us free” (Jesus) and will
keep us free for eternity. It should always be a “delight” (Isaiah), to be enjoyed
in the highest sense of freedom. Observed merely as obedience to an arbitrary
command, the Sabbath could turn us against God — even lead us to “crucify
Him once again” (Hebrews 6) — then hurry home to keep the Sabbath holy, as
happened that sad Friday nineteen hundred years ago.
Bible passages included:
Exodus 20:8, 11. “Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. . . . for in six
days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested
the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.”
RSV.
Revelation 14:7. “Honor God and give him glory, for his time has come to
sit in judgment. Worship the Creator of heaven and earth, the Creator of the
sea and the springs.” NAB, 1970.
Genesis 2:9. “In the middle of the garden were the tree of life and the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil.” NIV.
1 Corinthians 10:13. “But God keeps his promise, and he will not allow you
to be tested beyond your power to remain firm.” GNT.
Genesis 1:28. “Have many children, so that your descendants will live all
over the earth and bring it under their control. . . .” GNT.
Genesis 2:2–3. “On the sixth day God completed all the work he had been
doing, and on the seventh day he ceased from all his work. God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on that day he ceased from all the work he
had set himself to do.” NEB.
John 19:30. “It is finished.” KJV.
John 17:4. “I have finished the work which You have given Me to do.”
NKJV.
Mark 2:27. “The Sabbath was made for the good of man. . . .” GNT.
John 1:3. “Through him all things were made; without him nothing was
made that has been made.” NIV.
Colossians 1:16. “For by him all things were created: things in heaven and
on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him.” NIV.
Exodus 31:13. “Keep the Sabbath, my day of rest, because it is a sign
between you and me for all time to come, to show that I, the Lord, have made
you my own people.” GNT.
Ezekiel 20:20. “Make the Sabbath a holy day, so that it will be a sign of the
covenant we made, and will remind you that I am the Lord your God.” GNT.
Ezekiel 20:12. “I made the keeping of the Sabbath a sign of the agreement
between us, to remind them that I, the Lord, make them holy.” GNT.
Psalm 51:10. “Create in me a clean heart, O God.” KJV.
Deuteronomy 5:15. “Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the Lord
your God brought you out with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and for
that reason the Lord your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.” NEB.
Hebrews 4:9. “So there must still be a promised Sabbath of Rest for God’s
people.” Goodspeed.
“There must still be, therefore, a place of rest reserved for God’s people, the
seventh-day rest.” Jerusalem.
Ezekiel 20:12. “I gave them my sabbath, to mark the tie between me and
them, to teach them that it is I, the Eternal, who sets them apart.” Moffatt.
Revelation 14:12. “This calls for endurance on the part of God’s people,
those who obey God’s commandments and are faithful to Jesus.” GNT.
2 Peter 3:10. “The elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
the works that are therein shall be burned up.” KJV.
Revelation 21:1. “Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first
heaven and the first earth had passed away.” RSV.
Isaiah 65:17. “Behold, I will create new heavens and a new earth.” NIV.
Isaiah 66:23. “Month by month at the new moon, week by week on the sabbath, all mankind shall come to bow down before me, says the Lord.” NEB.
Chapter Eleven
God’s Emergency Measures
Another look at the “many and various ways” in which God has
worked to hold His family together as He demonstrates the
truth—all in the larger setting of the great controversy over His
character and government.
At infinite cost God has sought to convince the universe that His government will be for ever one of peace and freedom based on mutual and wellfounded trust. But when Satan plunged the family into the crisis of rebellion
and distrust, emergency measures were required to maintain a semblance of
order and respect until the basis for real peace and freedom could be clarified
and confirmed. God even had to command His children to stop lying, stealing,
cheating, and murdering one another. To gain our attention He had to raise His
voice on Sinai, rain fire on Mt. Carmel, and send she bears in Elisha’s day. The
One who sees the little sparrow fall had to establish a sacrificial system that
called for the death of thousands of His creatures. And the One who is love
personified had to set up a system of priestly mediation because His people
were either too irreverent or too afraid to be His friends. He even sent His Son
to be the One between, when there really is no need for anyone to stand
between us and our gracious God. Besides, the One who came is God, and no
one stood between Him and Judas as the Creator knelt to wash His betrayer’s
dirty feet.
How Satan has sought to pervert the meaning of God’s emergency measures
as evidence of the correctness of his charges that God is arbitrary, vengeful,
unforgiving, and severe! Perhaps Satan’s greatest success has been in leading
God’s children to believe that were it not for the constant intercession of His
Son, the Father could not find it in His own heart to forgive and heal.
Thank God for the emergency measures! But we must understand them
for what they are.
Bible passages included:
Galatians 3:19. “Why then the law? It was added because of transgressions.
. . .” RSV.
Galatians 3:24–25. “So the Law has been our attendant on our way to
Christ, so that we might be made upright through faith. But now that faith
has come, we are no longer in the charge of the attendant.” Goodspeed.
“So the law was put in charge to lead us to Christ that we might be justified
by faith. Now that faith has come, we are no longer under the supervision of
the law.” NIV.
Romans 3:31. “Does this mean that by this faith we do away with the Law?
No, not at all; instead, we uphold the Law.” GNT.
1 Timothy 1:8–9. “We know that the law is good if a man uses it properly.
We also know that law is made not for good men but for lawbreakers and rebels,
the ungodly and sinful.” NIV.
Hebrews 10:3–4. “But in these sacrifices there is a reminder of sin year after
year. For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away
sins.” RSV.
Jeremiah 7:22–23. “For on the day that I brought your fathers out of the
land of Egypt, I did not speak to them, nor give them command regarding
burnt-offering or sacrifice; but this command I gave them, ‘Listen to my voice,
and I will be your God, and you shall be my people.’” Smith/Goodspeed.
Jeremiah 3:16. “In those days . . . men shall speak no more of the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord; they shall not think of it nor remember it nor resort to
it; it will be needed no more.” NEB.
Jeremiah 31:33–34. “I will put my law within them, and I will write it upon
their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And no
longer shall each man teach his neighbor and each his brother, saying, ‘Know
the Lord,’ for they shall all know me. . . .” RSV.
Hosea 6:6. “It is true love that I have wanted, not sacrifice; the knowledge
of God rather then burnt offerings.” Phillips.
“I would rather have my people know me than have them burn offerings to
me.” GNT.
Exodus 20:19–20. “They said to Moses, ‘If you speak to us, we will listen;
but we are afraid that if God speaks to us, we will die.’ Moses replied, ‘Don’t
be afraid.’” GNT.
Deuteronomy 5:24–25, 27. “‘Today we have seen that it is possible for a man
to continue to live, even though God has spoken to him. But why should we
risk death again? That terrible fire will destroy us. We are sure to die if we hear
the Lord our God speak again. . . . Go back, Moses, and listen to everything that
the Lord our God says. Then return and tell us what he said to you. We will listen and obey.’” GNT.
Numbers 12:6–8. “If any man among you is a prophet I make myself known
to him in a vision, I speak to him in a dream. Not so with my servant Moses: he
is at home in my house; I speak with him face to face, plainly and not in riddles.”
Jerusalem.
Exodus 33:11. “Thus the Lord used to speak to Moses face to face, as a man
speaks to his friend.” RSV.
John 15:15. “No longer do I call you servants, for the servant does not know
what his master is doing; but I have called you friends, for all that I have heard
from my Father I have made known to you.” RSV.
John 16:25–27. “I have been speaking to you in parables — but the time is
coming to give up parables and tell you plainly about the Father. When that day
comes, you will make your requests to him in my name, for I need make no
promise to plead to the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you. . . .”
Phillips.
John 14:9. “He who has seen me has seen the Father.” RSV.
John 20:28. “Thomas answered him, ‘My Lord and my God!’” RSV.
Chapter Twelve
God’s Law is No Threat to Our Freedom
Another look at the requirements of God’s law, and especially the
Ten Commandments—in the larger setting of the great controversy over His character and government.
Jesus, Paul and Moses all agree that love is the fulfillment of God’s law. But
love and trust — the things that God desires the most — cannot be commanded
or produced by force. Nor can they be made an obligation, something that we
owe to God because He’s been so good to us. God wants more than this, and
so should we! Our heavenly Father values nothing higher than the freedom of
His family, and Jesus suffered and died to prove it. But real freedom requires
mutual love and trust that have been won and confirmed by unquestionable
evidence. This evidence is the truth that sets and keeps men free.
Then why does God seem to command our love in the Decalogue? The Ten
Commandments voiced on Sinai were another of God’s emergency measures in
the Great Controversy. But how He longs for love, trust and willingness to listen that are entirely free from fear, force or obligation.
This emphasis on freedom, love and trust does not minimize the requirements of God’s law. On the contrary, these are the very things the law was
designed to preserve. As one good friend of God has said, “The Ten
Commandments were given so that there would be no mistake as to the kind
of people God could trust with all the privileges and freedom of eternal life to
come.” Does this include the Sabbath? The Sabbath is the reminder of the evidence of the truth, without which we never could be free.
Bible passages included:
John 14:15; 15:14. “If you love me, you will keep my commandments. . . . You
are my friends if you do what I command you.” RSV.
Isaiah 29:13. “The Lord said, ‘These people claim to worship me, but their
words are meaningless, and their hearts are somewhere else. Their religion is
nothing but human rules and traditions, which they have simply memorized.’”
GNT.
Matthew 11:28–30. “Come to me, all of you who toil and are burdened, and
I will let you rest. Let my yoke be put upon you, and learn from me, for I am
gentle and humble-minded, and your hearts will find rest, for the yoke I offer
you is a kindly one, and the load I ask you to bear is light.” Goodspeed.
1 Timothy 1:8–9. “We know, of course, that the Law is good in itself and
has a legitimate function. Yet we also know that the Law is not really meant for
the good man, but for the man who has neither principles nor self-control.”
Phillips.
Galatians 5:13–14, 18, 22–23. “You, my brothers, were called to be free. . .
. The entire law is summed up in a single command: ‘Love your neighbor as
yourself. . . .’ But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under law. . . .But the
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
gentleness and self-control.” NIV.
Deuteronomy 6:5. “Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with
all your soul and with all your strength.” NIV.
Leviticus 19:17–18. “Do not hate your brother in your heart. . . . But love
your neighbor as yourself.” NIV.
1 Corinthians 13:4–6. “Love is patient and kind; love is not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude. Love does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrong, but rejoices in the right.” RSV.
Isaiah 58:13–14. “If you cease to tread the sabbath underfoot, and keep my
holy day free from your own affairs, if you call the sabbath a day of joy and the
Lord’s holy day a day to be honoured, if you honour it by not plying your trade,
not seeking your own interest or attending to your own affairs, then you shall
find your joy in the Lord.” NEB.
James 2:8, 12. “If you really keep the royal law found in Scripture, ‘Love
your neighbor as yourself,’ you are doing right. . . . Speak and act as those who
are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom.” NIV.
Different reasons for obeying God. Which do you prefer?
1. I do what I do because God has told me to, and He has the power to reward
and destroy.
2. I do what I do because God has told me to, and I love Him and want to
please Him.
3. I do what I do because I have found it to be right and sensible to do so, and
I have increasing admiration and reverence for the One who so advised and
commanded me in the days of my ignorance and immaturity. And being still
somewhat ignorant and immature, I am willing to trust and obey the One
whose counsel has always proved to be so sensible, when He commands me
to do something beyond my present understanding.
A description of true obedience:
“The man who attempts to keep the commandments of God from a sense of
obligation merely — because he is required to do so — will never enter into the
joy of obedience. He does not obey. . . . True obedience is the outworking of a
principle within. It springs from the love of righteousness, the love of the law
of God. The essence of all righteousness is loyalty to our Redeemer. This will
lead us to do right because it is right — because rightdoing is pleasing to God.”
Ellen G. White, Christ’s Object Lessons, 97–98.
Chapter Thirteen
How God Treats His Erring Children
Another look at some of the most convincing evidence that God is
not the kind of person His enemies have made Him out to be.
What will it be like some day to stand in the presence of the Infinite One
and realize that He knows everything about us? Even if we are among the
saved, will it be comfortable to spend eternity with Someone who knows us so
well? Will God haunt us with the memory of our sinful past?
Our answer to this question depends upon the kind of Person we believe our
God to be. All Scripture speaks to the question, not merely in promises and
claims but in evidence and demonstration. Never was the truth about this matter more clearly revealed than in the way Jesus treated even the worst of sinners — the woman who “lived an immoral life in the town,” self-righteous
Simon, the paralytic at the pool, the quarreling disciples, the traitor Judas,
cowardly and impulsive Peter, even His pretentiously pious accusers and the
men who nailed Him to the cross. Clearly we have no need to fear God’s infinite memory. God is forgiveness personified. Our heavenly Father finds no
pleasure in the embarrassment of His children. Sinners though we all have
been, we shall be comfortable in His presence for eternity.
Or would we only be comfortable and safe if God should blot out all memory — including His own — of everything that has happened in the Great
Controversy?
Bible passages included:
Revelation 20:11–12. “Then I saw a great white throne and him who sat
upon it. . . . And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and
books were opened. . . . And the dead were judged by what was written in the
books, by what they had done.” RSV.
Romans 3:10, 23. “There is not even one who is righteous. . . . For all have
sinned, and all fall short of God’s glorious ideal.” Twentieth Century New
Testament.
John 8:7, 9–11. “‘Whichever one of you has committed no sin may throw
the first stone at her. . . .’ When they heard this, they all left, one by one, the
older ones first. Jesus was left alone, with the woman still standing there. He
straightened up and said to her, ‘Where are they? Is there no one left to condemn you?’ ‘No one, sir,’ she answered. ‘Well, then,’ Jesus said, ‘I do not condemn you either. Go, but do not sin again.’” GNT.
John 13:27–29. “Jesus said to him, ‘Do quickly what you have to do.’ No
one at the table understood what he meant by this. Some supposed that, as
Judas was in charge of the common purse, Jesus was telling him to buy what
was needed for the festival, or to make some gift to the poor.” NEB.
Mark 14:27, 29, 31. “And Jesus said to them, ‘You will all fall away. . . .’
Peter said to him, ‘Even though they all fall away, I will not. . . . If I must die
with you, I will not deny you.’” RSV.
Matthew 26:69–70, 72, 74. “And a maid came up to him, and said, ‘You also
were with Jesus the Galilean.’ But he denied it before them all, saying, ‘I do not
know what you mean. . . . I do not know the man. . . .’ Then he began to invoke a
curse on himself and to swear, ‘I do not know the man.’” RSV.
Luke 22:61–62. “The Lord turned around and looked straight at Peter, and
Peter remembered that the Lord had said to him, ‘Before the rooster crows
tonight, you will say three times that you do not know me.’ Peter went out and
wept bitterly.” GNT.
John 20:17. “Jesus said to her: ‘Do not detain me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brethren and tell them that I am going up to my
Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’” Noli.
Mark 16:7. “‘Now go and give this message to his disciples, including Peter:
“He is going to Galilee ahead of you.”’” GNT.
Isaiah 38:17. “For thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.” RSV.
Micah 7:19. “You will trample our sins underfoot and send them to the bottom of the sea!” GNT.
2 Peter 3:9. “The Lord is. . . . patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.” NIV.
Ezekiel 33:11. “As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn back, turn
back from your evil ways; for why will you die, O house of Israel?” RSV.
Luke 15:20–24. “While he was still a long way off his father saw him, and
his heart went out to him. He ran to meet him, flung his arms round him, and
kissed him. The son said, ‘Father, I have sinned, against God and against you; I
am no longer fit to be called your son.’ But the father said to his servants,
‘Quick! fetch a robe, my best one, and put it on him. . . . And let us have a feast
to celebrate the day. For this son of mine was dead and has come back to life; he
was lost and is found.’” NEB.
Hosea 14:1–2, 4. “But come home, Israel, come home to the Lord your God!
. . . Take words of repentance with you as you return to the Lord. . . . I will heal
their unfaithfulness, I will love them with all my heart.” Phillips.
Hosea 11:7–8. “My people are bent on turning away from me. . . . How, oh
how, can I give you up Ephraim! How, oh how, can I hand you over, Israel!”
Phillips.
Romans 2:4. “Do you not know that God’s kindness is meant to lead you to
repentance?” RSV.
Chapter Fourteen
God Can Completely Heal the Damage Done
Another look at the meaning of perfection—in the larger setting
of the great controversy over God’s character and government.
In the Sermon on the Mount Jesus uttered those memorable words that continue to trouble saints and sinners alike, “You, therefore, must be perfect.” Or
should it be translated, “You, therefore, will be perfect”? Is it a promise or command?
Whether these words are encouraging or forbidding depends again on the
kind of Person we believe our God to be and on our understanding of what He
wants for His children throughout the universe — and especially for us on this
planet who have been so caught up in the damaging consequences of the great
controversy. Above all God wants peace and freedom in His family. This
requires mutual love and trust, maturity and self control. Such things cannot
be commanded, much less produced by force or fear. Instead God offers to set
right all that has gone wrong, to completely heal the damage done.
As our physician Father, God longs to make His children well. Our part is
not to heal ourselves but to cooperate. As Jesus said to the paralytic at the
pool, “Would you like to be made whole?” Perfection is a generous offer — not
a burdensome command! How could we turn such an offer down! But how do
we cooperate?
Bible passages included:
Matthew 5:48. “Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect.” KJV.
Luke 18:42. “Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved thee.” KJV.
“Receive your sight; your faith has healed you.” NIV.
Matthew 5:48. “You must be perfect.” GNT.
“Ye therefore shall be perfect.” American Standard.
“You are to be perfect.” Goodspeed.
1 Kings 9:4–5; 11:4, 6. “If you will walk before me, as David your father
walked, with integrity of heart and uprightness . . . I will establish your royal
throne. . . . When Solomon was old his wives turned away his heart after other
gods; and his heart was not wholly true to the Lord his God, as was the heart
of David his father. . . . Solomon did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, and
did not wholly follow the Lord, as David his father had done.” RSV.
2 Peter 1:21. “Holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost.” KJV.
Matthew 5:48. “You must become spiritually mature, as your heavenly
Father is perfect.” Norlie.
John 3:3. “Jesus answered, ‘I am telling you the truth: no one can see the
kingdom of God unless he is born again.’” GNT.
Romans 6:4. “By our baptism we were buried with Him in death, in order
that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the Father’s glorious power, we
also should live an entirely new life.” Weymouth.
Romans 6:3–4 footnote: “St. Paul alludes to the manner in which Baptism
was ordinarily conferred in the primitive Church, by immersion. The descent
into the water is suggestive of the descent of the body into the grave, and the
ascent is suggestive of a resurrection to a new life.” Kleist and Lilly.
Hebrews 5:12–6:1. “. . . though by this time you ought to be teachers, you
need someone to teach you the elementary truths of God’s word all over again.
You need milk, not solid food! Anyone who lives on milk, being still an infant,
is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness. But solid food is for
the mature, who by constant use have trained themselves to distinguish good
from evil. Therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about Christ and go
on to maturity. . . .” NIV.
Ephesians 4:12, 14–15. “His gifts were made that Christians might . . . arrive
at real maturity. . . . We are not meant to remain as children at the mercy of every
chance wind of teaching, and of the jockeying of men who are expert in the
crafty presentation of lies. But we are meant to speak the truth in love, and to
grow up in every way into Christ. . . .” Phillips.
1 Corinthians 13:4–5. “Love is patient and kind; love is not jealous or boastful; it is not arrogant or rude. Love does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful.” RSV.
2 Corinthians 3:18. “And then with unveiled faces we can all behold, as in
a mirror, the glory of the Lord. And we become changed into His likeness, from
glory to glory, through the Spirit of the Lord working in us.” Norlie.
Psalm 115:8. “Those who make them will be like them, and so will all who
trust in them.” NIV.
1 Corinthians 11:1. “Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ.” RSV.
One admirer’s description of Christ’s perfection and maturity:
“Christ carried out in His life His own divine teachings. His zeal never led
Him to become passionate. He manifested consistency without obstinacy, benevolence without weakness, tenderness and sympathy without sentimentalism. He
was highly social; yet He possessed a reserved dignity that did not encourage
undue familiarity. His temperance never led to bigotry or austerity. He was not
conformed to the world; yet He was not indifferent to the wants of the least
among men.” Ellen G. White, Evangelism, 638.
Chapter Fifteen
Talking to God as a Friend
Another look at the meaning and purpose of prayer—in the larger setting of the great controversy over the character and
government of God.
If, as Jesus said, our heavenly Father knows what our needs are even before
we ask Him, what is the purpose of taking time to pray at all? This assumes, of
course, that the primary purpose of prayer is to lodge our requests with God.
But some prefer to understand prayer as conversation with God as with a
Friend. Remember how Abraham and Moses talked to God, and God called
them His friends. Remember how boldly but reverently Job agonized with
God — to the consternation of Job’s friends — and God was honored with his
confidence. Truly the way we pray reveals the kind of Person we believe our
God to be.
If the Father were to appear visibly among us, how would we address Him?
What language would we use? Would we be too afraid to speak? Would we feel
constrained to mention only the most lofty themes, or would we be free to talk
candidly about what He already knows is in our hearts? Would it be easier to
discuss such matters with the Son? Would it be more appropriate to speak or
listen? How does one listen to the voice of God? And at the end of such a special meeting, would we feel that we ought to close the conversation with a
“word of prayer”? Or would it be correct to realize that in talking to God as a
Friend we have been praying all along?
Some day when we really see Him face to face, will that be the end of
prayer? Is prayer yet another of God’s emergency measures to keep open the
lines of communication with His children until there is no need to talk
together anymore? What do we mean when we sing, “Farewell, farewell,
sweet hour of prayer”?
Bible passages included:
Matthew 6:5–13. “When you pray, do not be like the hypocrites; they love
to say their prayers . . . for everyone to see them. . . . But when you pray, go into
a room by yourself, shut the door, and pray to your Father who is there in the
secret place. . . . In your prayers do not go babbling on like the heathen, who
imagine that the more they say the more likely they are to be heard. . . . Your
Father knows what your needs are before you ask him. This is how you should
pray: ‘Our Father in heaven, thy name be hallowed; thy kingdom come, thy
will be done, on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread. Forgive us
the wrong we have done, as we have forgiven those who have wronged us.
And do not bring us to the test, but save us from the evil one.’” NEB.
Matthew 14:23. “He went up into the hills by himself to pray.” RSV.
Luke 6:12. “All night he continued in prayer to God.” RSV.
John 15:15. “I have called you friends. . . .” RSV.
John 14:7, 9. “If you really knew me, you would know my Father as well. .
. . Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father.” NIV.
John 16:26-27. “I do not promise to intercede with the Father for you, for
the Father loves you himself. . . .” Goodspeed.
1 John 4:18. “There is no fear in love; perfect love drives out all fear . . . fear
has to do with punishment.” GNT.
Job 29:2–4; 30:20. “If only my life could once again be as it was when God
watched over me. God was always with me then. . . . And the friendship of God
protected my home. . . . I call to you, O God, but you never answer; and when I
pray, you pay no attention.” GNT.
Job 42:7. “You did not speak the truth about me, the way my servant Job
did.” GNT.
1 Corinthians 10:13. “God can be depended on not to let you be tried
beyond your strength.” Goodspeed.
Romans 8:28. “We know that in all things God works for good with those
who love him. . . .” GNT.
Genesis 18:23, 25. “Then Abraham drew near, and said, ‘Wilt thou indeed
destroy the righteous with the wicked ? . . . Far be that from thee! Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right?’” RSV.
James 2:23. “Abraham was called God’s friend.” GNT.
Numbers 14:11–13, 15–16. “And the Lord said to Moses. . . . ‘I will strike
them with the pestilence and disinherit them, and I will make of you a nation
greater and mightier than they.’ But Moses said to the Lord, ‘Then the
Egyptians will hear of it. . . . Then the nations who have heard thy fame will say,
“Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which he
swore to give to them, therefore he has slain them in the wilderness.”’” RSV.
Exodus 33:11. “The Lord would speak with Moses face-to-face, just as a man
speaks with a friend.” GNT.
Acts 10:13–14. “And there came a voice to him, ‘Rise, Peter; kill and eat.’
But Peter said, ‘No, Lord.’” RSV.
Psalm 77:7–10. “Will the Lord spurn for ever, and never again be favorable?
Has his steadfast love for ever ceased? Are his promises at an end for all time?
Has God forgotten to be gracious? . . . And I say, ‘It is my grief that the right
hand of the Most High has changed.’” RSV.
Psalm 139:19, 21–24. “O that thou wouldst slay the wicked, O God. . . . Do
I not hate them that hate thee, O Lord? And do I not loathe them that rise
up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them my enemies.
Search me, O God, and know my heart! Try me and know my thoughts! And
see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting!”
RSV.
Romans 8:26. “Likewise the Spirit helps us in our weakness; for we do not
know how to pray as we ought. . . .” RSV.
1 Thessalonians 5:17. “Never stop praying.” Norlie.
Chapter Sixteen
God’s Last Pleading with His Children
Another look at the three angels’ messages of Revelation 14 —in
the larger setting of the great controversy over the character and
government of God.
In the last of the sixty-six books, the war that began up in heaven is
described as culminating in three final messages of warning and invitation — all
sent from a heavenly Father who wants none of His children to be lost. The
first angel speaks of the everlasting good news and calls on people everywhere
to make up their minds about their Creator. What is this good news, this eternal truth that has always been and will forever remain the foundation of our
trust in God? Can we, like Paul, be so convinced about this truth that not even
an angel from heaven could persuade us otherwise? (Galatians 1)
The second angel speaks of the final collapse of Satan’s opposition in corruption and defeat. The third describes the inevitable consequence of preferring
Satan’s lies to the everlasting truth. The third angel’s message is the most fearsome in all the Bible, and the enemy would have us misunderstand it as the
words of an angry God. But all the previous books of Scripture have prepared
us to understand the terrible consequence of sin and how God would do anything to spare His children. For one last time our heavenly Father — the One
who would so much rather speak to us gently of the truth — raises His voice in
awesome warning and appeal: “If you are bent on leaving Me, I must let you
go!”
We could trust the God we worship to send these three final messages to
the world. In these last days before the end He would not leave His children
unenlightened and unwarned. And behind the fearsome wording of the third
angel’s message stands the God of Hosea crying, “Why will you die? How can
I give you up! How can I let you go!”
Bible passages included:
Revelation 14:6–12. “Then I saw another angel flying in midair, and he had
the eternal gospel to proclaim to those who live on the earth — to every nation,
tribe, language and people. He said in a loud voice, ‘Fear God and give him
glory, because the hour of his judgment has come. Worship him who made the
heavens, the earth, the sea and the springs of water.’
“A second angel followed and said, ‘Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the Great,
which made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her adulteries.’
“A third angel followed them and said in a loud voice: ‘If anyone worships
the beast and his image and receives his mark on the forehead or on the hand,
he, too, will drink of the wine of God’s fury, which has been poured full
strength into the cup of his wrath. He will be tormented with burning sulfur
in the presence of the holy angels and of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment rises for ever and ever. There is no rest day or night for those who wor-
ship the beast and his image, or for anyone who receives the mark of his name.’
This calls for patient endurance on the part of the saints who obey God’s commandments and remain faithful to Jesus.” NIV.
Galatians 1:8–9. “If anyone, if we ourselves or an angel from heaven, should
preach a gospel at variance with the gospel we preached to you, he shall be held
outcast. I now repeat what I have said before: if anyone preaches a gospel at
variance with the gospel which you received, let him be outcast!” NEB.
Galatians 1:6–7. “I am astonished to find you turning so quickly away . . . and
following a different gospel. Not that it is in fact another gospel; only there are
persons who unsettle your minds by trying to distort the gospel of Christ.”
NEB.
Galatians 3:1. “You foolish Galatians! Who put a spell on you? Before your
very eyes you had a clear description of the death of Jesus Christ on the cross!”
GNT.
Galatians 4:8–9. “In the past you did not know God, and so you were slaves
of beings who are not gods. But now that you know God . . . how is it that you
want to turn back?” GNT.
1 Corinthians 1:17–18. “Christ did not send me to baptize. He sent me to
tell the Good News. . . . For the message about Christ’s death on the cross is
nonsense to those who are being lost; but for us who are being saved it is God’s
power.” GNT.
Romans 1:16–17. “For I am not ashamed of the gospel: it is the power of
God for salvation. . . . For in it the righteousness of God is revealed. . . .” RSV.
Jeremiah 9:24. “Let him who boasts boast about this: that he understands
and knows me, that I am the Lord, who exercises kindness, justice and righteousness on earth, for in these I delight, declares the Lord.” NIV.
Romans 3:25–26. “For God showed Him publicly dying as a means of reconciliation . . . This was to demonstrate God’s own righteousness . . . to show that
He Himself is righteous and that He sets right everyone who trusts in Jesus.”
Maxwell.
John 8:32. “You will know the truth and the truth will set you free.”
Williams.
Galatians 5:1. “This is the freedom with which Christ has made us free. So
keep on standing in it, and stop letting your necks be fastened in the yoke of
slavery again.” Williams.
Romans 1:4–5. “Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom I have received grace
and a commission for His Name’s sake to win men to the obedience that springs
from faith. . . .” Weymouth.
1 John 4:16, 18. “God is love. . . . There is no fear in love.” Williams.
Matthew 24:14. “And this Good News about the Kingdom will be
preached through all the world . . . and then the end will come.” GNT.
Chapter Seventeen
Satan’s Final Effort to Deceive
Another look at the enemy’s last, most diabolical attempt to mislead us into joining his side in the great controversy over the character and government of God.
The book of Revelation describes not only God’s last pleading with His
children (Chapter 14) but also Satan’s final effort to deceive (Chapter 13).
Though Jesus said that He “saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven” (Luke
10:18), the defeated enemy of God and man still “prowls around like a roaring
lion” (1 Peter 5:8), knowing that his time is short (Revelation 12:12). The one
whose insane desire to be God led to the war up in heaven will at last seem to
enjoy complete success. “All who dwell on earth will worship him” — except
those who prefer to believe Jesus’ testimony about His Father (Revelation
12:17) and so remain loyal to God (Revelation 14:12). Naturally these loyal
ones are the object of Satan’s special efforts to deceive.
If even angels could be taken in, how can mere humans hope to resist Satan’s
most cunning persuasion? History warns of over-confidence. Even God’s chosen people in the Promised Land were misled into crucifying their Redeemer
and then hurrying home to keep the Sabbath holy. They read their Bibles, paid
their tithe, watch their diet — and hated Jesus’ picture of the Father! Is it possible we could be similarly deceived?
Just as through the centuries God has demonstrated His trustworthiness, so
Satan has displayed his ability and willingness to deceive. His counterfeit of the
first coming of Christ in the “mystery religions” should alert us to expect brilliant counterfeits of the second coming in the end. Since truth and evidence are
not on Satan’s side, he has countered with the widely held belief that religious
faith requires no evidence, that religious claims need not be investigated. Such
subjects as sin, the atonement, the cross, the law, the judgment, Christ’s intercession, the destruction of the wicked, have all been bent to support his misrepresentations of our God. How can we prepare to resist his final efforts to
deceive?
Bible passages included:
Revelation 4:8, 11; 15:3–4. “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. . .
. You are worthy, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power. . . .
Great and marvelous are your deeds, Lord God Almighty. Just and true are
your ways, King of the ages. Who will not fear you, O Lord, and bring glory
to your name? For you alone are holy. All nations will come and worship before
you, for your righteous acts have been revealed.” NIV.
Luke 10:18. “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.” RSV.
Revelation 12:12. “Be glad, you heavens, and all you that live there! But
how terrible for the earth and the sea! For the Devil has come down to you,
and he is filled with rage, because he knows that he has only a little time left.”
GNT.
1 Peter 5:8–9. “Be alert, be on watch! Your enemy, the Devil, roams around
like a roaring lion, looking for someone to devour. Be firm in your faith and
resist him. . . .” GNT.
Revelation 13:5, 7–8, 10. “The beast was allowed to make proud claims
which were insulting to God. . . . It was allowed to fight against God’s people
and to defeat them. . . . All people living on earth will worship it, except those
whose names were written before the creation of the world in the book of the
living. . . . This calls for endurance and faith on the part of God’s people.” GNT.
Revelation 12:17. “All those who obey God’s commandments and are faithful to the truth revealed by Jesus.” GNT.
John 8:48. “The Jews answered him, ‘Aren’t we right in saying that you are
a Samaritan and demon-possessed?’” NIV.
Matthew 23:15, 23–24. “How terrible for you, teachers of the Law and
Pharisees! You hypocrites! You sail the seas and cross whole countries to win
one convert; and when you succeed, you make him twice as deserving of going
to hell as you yourselves are! . . . You give to God one tenth even of the seasoning
herbs, such as mint, dill, and cummin, but you neglect to obey the really important teachings of the Law, such as justice and mercy and honesty. . . . Blind
guides! You strain a fly out of your drink, but swallow a camel!” GNT.
John 18:28. “Early in the morning Jesus was taken from Caiaphas’ house to
the governor’s palace. The Jewish authorities did not go inside the palace, for
they wanted to keep themselves ritually clean, in order to be able to eat the
Passover meal.” GNT.
John 19:31. “Now it was the day of Preparation, and the next day was to be
a special Sabbath. Because the Jews did not want the bodies left on the crosses
during the Sabbath, they asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies
taken down.” NIV.
Matthew 7:22–23. “When the Judgment Day comes, many will say to me,
‘Lord, Lord! In your name we spoke God’s message, by your name we drove out
many demons and performed many miracles!’ Then I will say to them, ‘I never
knew you.’” GNT.
Revelation 3:15–17. “I know what you have done; I know that you are neither cold nor hot. How I wish you were either one or the other! But because
you are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I am going to spit you out of my mouth!
You say, ‘I am rich and well off; I have all I need.’ But you do not know how
miserable and pitiful you are! You are poor, naked, and blind.” GNT.
1 John 4:1–2. “Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits
to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out
into the world. This is how you can recognize the Spirit of God: Every spirit
that acknowledges that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God.” NIV.
Chapter Eighteen
God Waits for His Children to Grow Up
Another look at the reasons for the apparent delay of the final
events in the great controversy over the character and government of God.
Almost two thousand years have passed since God won His case on Calvary.
Satan’s lies and accusations have long ago been met. The freedom of the universe has been eternally secured. Why, then, does God still tolerate this one
rebellious spot in His loyal universe? He longs to re-create our world and give
it to His trusting saints. Why does He still wait?
When Jesus returns, He will come to a generation of believers who have
experienced Satan’s last supreme attempt to deceive and destroy God’s loyal
children on this planet. They will have accomplished what one-third of the
angels failed to do. They will have refused to be turned against God by Satan’s
lies. They will have been able to say with Paul, “If anyone — even an angel
from heaven — should bring a different version of the everlasting Good News,
he is wrong, and we will not believe it!” (Galatians 1) These are not babes in
the truth. They are grown-up believers. They meet the biblical description of
Christian perfection and maturity: they have “Their faculties trained by practice to distinguish good from evil.” (Hebrews 5:14) They have not only the
teachable faith of a little child, which still needs much protection, but — like
Job — they can stand alone. Though their faith be severely tested, they will
never let God down.
God is waiting for such firm believers. The last book in the Bible pictures
the angels as mercifully holding back the final winds of strife until the minds
of God’s children have been unshakably sealed and settled into the truth.
But what is this truth? Remember the pious beliefs of those who nailed
Jesus to the cross — then hurried home to keep the Sabbath holy! Do we accept
Jesus’ testimony about His Father? Are we convinced that God is just as gracious as the Son? Or are we still “easily swayed by every wind of doctrine”?
(Ephesians 4) Do we still need emergency measures to be reverent and do what
is right? Are we the reason why God still waits?
Bible passages included:
Daniel 12:1, 3. “There will be a time of distress such as has not happened
from the beginning of nations until then. But at that time your people — everyone whose name is found written in the book — will be delivered. . . .Those who
are wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens, and those who lead many
to righteousness, like the stars for ever and ever.” NIV.
1 Timothy 4:1–3. “The Spirit clearly says that in later times some will abandon the faith and follow deceiving spirits and things taught by demons. Such
teachings come through hypocritical liars, whose consciences have been seared
as with a hot iron. They forbid people to marry and order them to abstain from
certain foods, which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those
who believe and who know the truth.” NIV.
2 Thessalonians 2:1, 3–4, 6–7, 9–10. “Concerning the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. . . . Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not
come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed. . . . He
opposes and exalts himself over everything that is called God or is worshiped,
and even sets himself up in God’s temple, proclaiming himself to be God. . . .
And now you know what is holding him back. . . . For the secret power of lawlessness is already at work; but the one who now holds it back will continue to
do so till he is taken out of the way. . . . The coming of the lawless one will be in
accordance with the work of Satan displayed in all kinds of counterfeit miracles,
signs and wonders, and in every sort of evil that deceives those who are perishing. They perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.” NIV.
Revelation 7:1–3. “After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners
of the earth, holding back the four winds of the earth, that no wind might blow
on earth or sea or against any tree. Then I saw another angel ascend from the
rising of the sun, with the seal of the living God, and he called with a loud voice
to the four angels. . . . ‘Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees, till we have
sealed the servants of our God upon their foreheads.’” RSV.
Ephesians 4:30. “Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you
were sealed for the day of redemption.” NIV.
Ephesians 1:13. “In him you also, who have heard the word of truth, the
gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit. . . .” RSV.
Ephesians 1:17. “I keep asking that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
glorious Father, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, so that you
may know him better.” NIV.
John 14:26; 15:26–27; 16:13. “The Holy Spirit . . . will be your teacher and
will bring to your minds all that I have said to you. . . . But when the Helper
comes, that is, the Spirit of truth . . . he will speak plainly about me. And you
yourselves will also speak plainly about me. . . . [The Spirit] will guide you into
everything that is true.” Phillips.
Ephesians 4:14–15. “We are no longer to be children, tossed by the waves
and whirled about by every fresh gust of teaching, dupes of crafty rogues and
their deceitful schemes. No, let us speak the truth in love; so shall we fully
grow up into Christ.” NEB.
Hebrews 5:13–14; 6:1. “Anyone who lives on milk, being still an infant, is
not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness. But solid food is for the
mature, who by constant use have trained themselves to distinguish good from
evil. Therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about Christ and go on to
maturity. . . .” NIV.
1 Corinthians 13:11. “When I was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like
a child, I reasoned like a child; when I became a man, I gave up childish ways.”
RSV.
Ephesians 6:11–14. “Put on all the armour which God provides, so that you
may be able to stand firm against the devices of the devil. For our fight is not
against human foes, but against cosmic powers, against the authorities and
potentates of this dark world, against the superhuman forces of evil in the heavens. Therefore, take up God’s armour; then you will be able to stand your
ground when things are at their worst, to complete every task and still to
stand. Stand firm, I say. Fasten on the belt of truth.” NEB.
Chapter Nineteen
How Soon Will the Conflict Be Over?
The question this time is not when, but how soon? The conflict will be
over when God’s children on this planet have fully responded to His last pleading (Chapter Eighteen), are so settled into the truth that they can resist Satan’s
final effort to deceive (Chapter Seventeen) and as grown-up believers can not
only survive the time of trouble but, like Job, speak well and truly of our heavenly Father (Chapter Eighteen).
“How soon?” the disciples asked Jesus. “Tell us, when will this happen?
What will be the signal for your coming and the end of the world.” (Matthew
24:3) Jesus spoke of alarming disturbances in earth and sky, of growing distrust
between the nations, the rise of false religious leaders — and the Good News
going to all the world. He said the end was near — more than 1900 years ago!
But how near is “near?” Not long before he died John wrote, “Children, it is
the last hour. . . .we know that it is the last hour.” (1 John 2:18) Was he wrong?
When John arises at the Second Coming he will be surprised to find how long
he has been asleep. He may have some questions but surely no complaints! And
there will be earth-shaking events for him yet to see.
About a century and a half ago there arose in various parts of the world the
growing conviction that the time had come for Jesus to return. Thousands of
Christians the world around still agree that those early adventist believers had
indeed seen God’s signal that Christ was coming soon. But this was not a signal
to withdraw from the world and pack for the trip up to Heaven. It was a call
from God to finish the work of preparing the world for His coming.
It is true that time has continued much longer than early adventists expected. The signs that so stirred them are now well over a hundred years old. But
are we surprised, even ashamed, that our God has been willing to wait? Are we
concerned about our reputation or His? If by our failure to complete our task
we may have contributed to the delay, then we deserve to be ashamed. But the
longer God waits, the more gracious He looks. His delay only confirms the Good
News!
How much longer do you think God will have to wait? We can trust Him
to wait as long as there is hope for anyone. But the One who reads our every
thought will know when all final decisions are made. “So then,” Jesus advised,
“you must always be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when
you are not expecting him.” (Matthew 24:44) To which Paul added, “But you,
brothers, are not in darkness, and the Day should not take you by surprise.” (1
Thessalonians 5:4) What should we be looking for?
Bible passages included:
Matthew 24:3. “Tell us, when will this be and how can we tell when You’re
coming back and the world will come to an end?” Beck.
Matthew 24:36. “But about that day and hour no one knows, not even the
angels in heaven, not even the Son; only the Father.” NEB.
John 14:1, 3. “Set your troubled hearts at rest. Trust in God always; trust
also in me. . . . I shall come again and receive you to myself, so that where I am
you may be also.” NEB.
Matthew 24:26-27, 30–31. “Don’t believe it. For the Son of Man will
come like the lightning which flashes across the whole sky from the east to
the west. . . . And all the peoples of earth will weep as they see the Son of
Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. The great
trumpet will sound, and he will send out his angels to the four corners of the
earth, and they will gather his chosen people from one end of the world to
the other.” GNT.
Revelation 1:7. “Every eye will see him.” RSV.
Isaiah 25:9. “In that day they will say, ‘Surely this is our God; we trusted
in him, and he saved us. This is the Lord, we trusted in him; let us rejoice and
be glad in his salvation.’” NIV.
Revelation 6:16. “They called to the mountains and the rocks, ‘Fall on us
and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne and from the wrath of
the Lamb!’” NIV.
2 Chronicles 36:15–16. “The Lord, the God of their fathers, sent persistently to them by his messengers, because he had compassion on his people . . . but
they kept mocking the messengers of God, despising his words, and scoffing at
his prophets, till the wrath of the Lord rose against his people, till there was
no remedy.” RSV.
Romans 2:4. “Are you, perhaps, misinterpreting God’s generosity and
patient mercy toward you as weakness on his part? Don’t you realise that
God’s kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?” Phillips.
Habakkuk 2:3. “It may seem slow in coming, but wait for it; it will certainly take place.” GNT.
2 Peter 3:3–4. “In the last days there will come men who scoff at religion
and live self-indulgent lives, and they will say: ‘Where now is the promise of
his coming? Our fathers have been laid to their rest, but still everything continues exactly as it has always been since the world began.’” NEB.
2 Peter 3:9. “It is not that the Lord is slow in fulfilling his promise, as some
suppose, but that he is very patient with you, because it is not his will for any
to be lost, but for all to come to repentance.” NEB.
Jonah 4:2–3. “Lord, didn’t I say before I left home that this is just what you
would do? That’s why I did my best to run away to Spain! I knew that you are
a loving and merciful God, always patient, always kind, and always ready to
change your mind and not punish. Now then, Lord, let me die. I am better off
dead than alive.” GNT.
Matthew 24:29. “The sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its
light; the stars will fall from the sky. . . .” NIV.
2 Peter 3:12. “Look eagerly for the coming of the Day of God and work
to hasten it on.” NEB.
Matthew 24:44. “So then, you also must always be ready, because the Son
of Man will come at an hour when you are not expecting him.” GNT.
1 Thessalonians 5:4. “But you, brothers, are not living in darkness, and so
the day will not like a thief take you by surprise.” Kleist and Lilly.
Chapter Twenty
At Peace with our Heavenly Father
Another look at God’s successful but very costly resolution of the
crisis in His family.
We began these conversations by remembering that there once was peace
throughout the universe. And there was peace because all the members of
God’s vast family trusted each other, all of them trusted their heavenly Father,
and He in turn could safely trust in them. But we have also talked about the
war that began up in heaven, the conflict of distrust, the false charges of the
adversary, and God’s patient demonstration of the truth. The conflict was not
over mere obedience to the rules but over the character and government of God
Himself. Victory for God is not the destruction of His enemies. This He could
have accomplished by the merest command or manifestation of almighty power.
But God’s enemies are His own beloved but misbehaving children. There is no
victory for God until what went wrong has been set right, till peace has been
eternally secured — not a false peace based on force or fear but real peace based
on freely given love and trust.
There could be no peace if God were as Satan has made Him out to be — arbitrary, vengeful, unforgiving and severe. Mere pardon and adjustment of one’s
legal standing would not produce peace between sinners and this kind of God.
Yet there are explanations of salvation that seem based on the assumption that
Satan’s accusations are the truth. “God is arbitrary,” some will say, “but as
Sovereign He has the right to be.” “God takes vengeance, but for Him we
should call it justice.” Few would suggest that God is unforgiving and severe,
but many imply the same by urging the necessity of a Friend up there to plead
with God to forgive and heal.
Paul told early Christians that since we have been won back to trust and so
set right with God we should go on enjoying the peace we have with God
through Jesus Christ. (Romans 5:1) Jesus came to bring peace with God, not by
paying some legal penalty so God would not have to kill us after all. He brought
peace by showing us the truth about our God, that there is no need to be afraid.
God will indeed give up those who refuse to trust and listen and let Him heal.
But God will not torture to death His dying children. Jesus brought peace, not
so much by assuring us that He would be our Friend in court but by showing
that there is no need for Him to plead with God in our behalf, for the Father is
just as much our Friend.
Truly the only way to set and keep us right was for Jesus to come and
demonstrate the truth about the Father. And so, as one of God’s best friends
has said, “The whole purpose of Christ’s mission on this earth was to set men
right by revealing the truth about God’s character.” This is the truth that sets
us free. This is the truth that brings everlasting peace. But do we like it? Do
we want it? Like God, would we give up anything to have such peace?
Bible passages included:
Romans 5:1. “Therefore, since we are justified by faith, we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ.” RSV.
“Let us have peace.” Douay-Rheims, Challoner.
“Let us enjoy the peace we have.” Moffatt.
“Let us continue to enjoy the peace we have.” Montgomery.
1 Kings 9:3–4. “The Lord said to [Solomon] ‘if you walk before me in
integrity of heart and uprightness, as David your father did. . . .’” NIV.
Colossians 1:20. “Through him God chose to reconcile the whole universe
to himself, making peace through the shedding of his blood upon the cross.”
NEB.
Matthew 10:34–36. “Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the
world. No, I did not come to bring peace, but a sword. I came to set sons
against their fathers, daughters against their mothers, daughters-in-law against
their mothers-in-law; a man’s worst enemies will be the members of his own
family.” GNT.
John 1:11. “He came to his home, and his own family did not welcome him.”
Goodspeed.
1 Peter 4:12–14. “. . . do not be surprised at the painful test you are suffering.
. . . Rather be glad that you are sharing Christ’s sufferings. . . . Happy are you if
you are insulted because you are Christ’s followers; this means that the glorious
Spirit, the Spirit of God, is resting on you.” GNT.
Galatians 5:22. “The Spirit, on the other hand, brings a harvest of love, joy,
peace.” Weymouth.
John 14:26–27. “. . . the Counselor, the Holy Spirit . . . will remind you of
everything I have said to you. Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. . . .
Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid.” NIV.
John 16:33; 17:1, 3–4. “‘I have told you all this so that you may find peace
in me. In the world you will have trouble, but be brave; I have conquered the
world.’ ‘Father. . . . eternal life is this: to know you, the only true God. . . . I have
glorified you on earth and finished the work that you gave me to do.’”
Jerusalem.
Romans 7:23–24. “I see a different law at work in my body — a law that
fights against the law which my mind approves of . . . It makes me a prisoner. . .
.What an unhappy man I am! Who will rescue me?” GNT.
Romans 8:31, 38–39. “If God is for us, who can be against us? . . . I am certain
that . . . neither angels nor other heavenly rulers or powers . . . will ever be able to
separate us from the love of God.” GNT.
Hebrews 12:11. “No discipline seems pleasant at the time. . . . Later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace. . . .” NIV.
Romans 5:3–4. “We can be full of joy here and now even in our trials and
troubles. These very things will give us patient endurance; this in turn will
develop a mature character.” Phillips.
Isaiah 26:3. “You, Lord, give perfect peace to those who keep their purpose
firm and put their trust in you.” GNT.
Hebrews 4:2. “For we have heard the Good News, just as they did. They
heard the message, but it did them no good, because when they heard it, they
did not accept it with faith.” GNT.
Scripture Index
GENESIS
Gen. 1:3 (Ch. 10)
Gen. 1:28 (Ch. 10)
Gen. 1:31 (Ch. 10)
Gen. 2:2–3 (Ch. 10)
Gen. 2:7 (Ch. 2, 5)
Gen. 2:9 (Ch. 10)
Gen. 2:17 (Ch. 6, 8, 16)
Gen. 3 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 3:1–5 (Ch. 1)
Gen. 3:4 (Ch. 9, 11)
Gen. 3:4–5 (Ch. 8)
Gen. 3:5 (Ch. 4)
Gen. 3:10–11 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 4 (Ch. 14)
Gen. 4:1 (Ch. 2, 8)
Gen. 4:23 (Ch. 14)
Gen. 5 (Ch. 14)
Gen. 5:23–24 (Ch. 14)
Gen. 6–7 (Ch. 8)
Gen. 6:6 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 6:13 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 6:17 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 7:4 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 7:21–23 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 9:11 (Ch. 4)
Gen. 9:12–13 (Ch. 4)
Gen. 11:1–4 (Ch. 4)
Gen. 11:1–9 (Ch. 20)
Gen. 15:6 (Ch. 14)
Gen. 18:21 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 18:23 (Ch. 15)
Gen. 18:25 (Ch. 4, 15)
Gen. 19:24–25 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 19:26 (Ch. 6)
Gen. 22:1–3 (Ch. 3)
Gen. 22:8 (Ch. 3)
EXODUS
Exod. 7:10–12, 20–22 (Ch. 4)
Exod. 8:6–7 (Ch. 4)
Exod. 11:4–6 (Ch. 6, 8)
Exod. 12:12 (Ch. 7)
Exod. 12:29–30 (Ch. 8)
Exod. 15:23–25 (Ch. 7)
Exod. 19 (Ch. 6)
Exod. 19:12–13 (Ch. 9)
Exod. 19:16 (Ch. 15)
Exod. 19:16–19 (Ch. 16, 18)
Exod. 19:16–21 (Ch. 11)
Exod. 19:18 (Ch. 11)
Exod. 20:3 (Ch. 7, 12)
Exod. 20:3–17 (Ch. 11)
Exod. 20:4–6 (Ch. 7)
Exod. 20:8 (Ch. 10, 20)
Exod. 20:8–11 (Ch. 10)
Exod. 20:10 (Ch. 10)
Exod. 20:11 (Ch. 7, 10, 20)
Exod. 20:13–16 (Ch. 12)
Exod. 20:17 (Ch. 6, 12)
Exod. 20:18 (Ch. 16)
Exod. 20:18–20 (Ch. 9)
Exod. 20:19 (Ch. 6, 11, 15)
Exod. 20:19–20 (Ch. 11)
Exod. 20:20 (Ch. 9, 12, 15)
Exod. 21:2–6 (Ch. 16)
Exod. 21:6 (Ch. 9)
Exod. 21:24 (Ch. 6)
Exod. 23:19 (Ch. 6)
Exod. 23:23–30 (Ch. 12, 20)
Exod. 24:17 (Ch. 9)
Exod. 25:17–22 (Ch. 8)
Exod. 26:34 (Ch. 8)
Exod. 28:11 (Ch. 6)
Exod. 31:13 (Ch. 10)
Exod. 32:1–20 (Ch. 9)
Exod. 32:9–10 (Ch. 15)
Exod. 32:10 (Ch. 2)
Exod. 32:11–13 (Ch. 2)
Exod. 32:15–16 (Ch. 2)
Exod. 33:9–11 (Ch. 2)
Exod. 33:11 (Ch. 2, 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 15)
Exod. 33:17 (Ch. 3)
Exod. 34:6–7 (Ch. 7)
Exod. 34:26 (Ch. 6)
Exod. 34:29 (Ch. 5)
LEVITICUS
Lev. 10:1–3 (Ch. 6)
Lev. 19:17–18 (Ch. 12)
Lev. 19:18 (Ch. 8, 20)
Lev. 20:10 (Ch. 13)
Lev. 24:20 (Ch. 6, 11)
NUMBERS
Num. 3:2–4 (Ch. 6)
Num. 12:6–8 (Ch. 11)
Num. 14:13–16 (Ch. 15)
Num. 16:1–35 (Ch. 6)
Num. 20:5 (Ch. 2)
Num. 20:7–8 (Ch. 2)
Num. 20:8 (Ch. 2)
Num. 20:10 (Ch. 2)
Num. 20:10–11 (Ch. 2)
Num. 20:11 (Ch. 2)
Num. 20:12 (Ch. 2)
Num. 25:1–18 (Ch. 11)
DEUTERONOMY
Deut. 3:26 (Ch. 2)
Deut. 5:15 (Ch. 7, 10)
Deut. 5:24–25 (Ch. 11)
Deut. 5:27 (Ch. 11)
Deut. 6:4–5 (Ch. 8, 20)
Deut. 6:5 (Ch. 12)
Deut. 13 (Ch. 7)
Deut. 13:1–3 (Ch. 4, 7)
Deut. 14:21 (Ch. 6)
Deut. 14:22–26 (Ch. 16)
Deut. 14:24–26 (Ch. 6)
Deut. 19:21 (Ch. 6)
Deut. 21:20–21 (Ch. 6)
Deut. 23:2 (Ch. 6)
Deut. 24:1–3 (Ch. 6, 11)
Deut. 32:10 (Ch. 13)
Deut. 32:35 (Ch. 8)
Deut. 34:6 (Ch. 2)
JOSHUA
Josh. 2:1–14 (Ch. 3)
Josh. 7 (Ch. 13)
Josh. 7:12–13 (Ch. 6)
Josh. 7:24–25 (Ch. 6)
JUDGES
Judg. 3:15–28 (Ch. 6)
Judg. 6:22–23 (Ch. 9)
Judg. 6:36–40 (Ch. 3, 4)
Judg. 13–16 (Ch. 3)
Judg. 15:14–16 (Ch. 4)
Judg. 15:15–17 (Ch. 6)
Judg. 19:1–30 (Ch. 6)
1 SAMUEL
1 Sam. 2:22–25 (Ch. 7)
1 Sam. 4:3–4 (Ch. 7)
1 Sam. 5 (Ch. 7)
1 Sam. 5:3 (Ch. 7)
1 Sam. 5:4 (Ch. 7)
1 Sam. 6:1–7 (Ch. 7)
1 Sam. 15:3 (Ch. 6)
1 Sam. 15:8–9 (Ch. 6)
1 Sam. 15:18–19 (Ch. 6)
1 Sam. 15:23–24 (Ch. 6)
1 Sam. 31:2–5 (Ch. 13)
2 SAMUEL
2 Sam. 6:2–7 (Ch. 7)
2 Sam. 6:3–8 (Ch. 6)
2 Sam. 6:8–10 (Ch. 7)
2 Sam. 6:11–12 (Ch. 7)
2 Sam. 6:13–14 (Ch. 7)
1 KINGS
1 Kings 9:3–4 (Ch. 20)
1 Kings 9:4–5 (Ch. 14)
1 Kings 11:4 (Ch. 14)
1 Kings 11:4–6 (Ch. 14)
1 Kings 11:5 (Ch. 14)
1 Kings 11:6 (Ch. 13, 14)
1 Kings 11:7 (Ch. 14)
1 Kings 13 (Ch. 4, 7)
1 Kings 13:15–18 (Ch. 4)
1 Kings 13:18 (Ch. 15, 17)
1 Kings 17:17–24 (Ch. 7)
1 Kings 18:19 (Ch. 7)
1 Kings 18:22 (Ch. 7)
1 Kings 18:38–39 (Ch. 7, 11)
1 Kings 19:4 (Ch. 7)
1 Kings 19:11–12 (Ch. 7, 18)
1 Kings 19:12 (Ch. 9)
2 KINGS
2 Kings 1:16 (Ch. 7, 11)
2 Kings 2:19–22 (Ch. 7)
2 Kings 2:23 (Ch. 11)
2 Kings 2:23–24 (Ch. 6, 7)
2 Kings 2:24 (Ch. 11, 16)
2 Kings 19:35 (Ch. 6, 8)
2 Kings 21:16 (Ch. 14)
1 CHRONICLES
1 Chron. 10:13–14 (Ch. 13)
1 Chron. 28:3 (Ch. 20)
1 Chron. 29:10–13 (Ch. 15)
2 CHRONICLES
2 Chron. 20:7 (Ch. 14)
2 Chron. 29:15–19 (Ch. 11)
2 Chron. 33:11–23 (Ch. 14)
2 Chron. 36:15–16 (Ch. 19)
EZRA
Ezra 10:2 (Ch. 2)
JOB
Job 1–2 (Ch. 7, 8, 11, 18)
Job 1:8 (Ch. 14)
Job 2:3–6 (Ch. 18)
Job 2:5 (Ch. 17)
Job 2:6 (Ch. 17)
Job 13:15 (Ch. 12)
Job 13:22 (Ch. 6)
Job 13:24 (Ch. 6)
Job 16:2 (Ch. 6, 17, 18)
Job 29:2–4 (Ch. 15)
Job 30:20 (Ch. 15, 17)
Job 31:35 (Ch. 6)
Job 41:18 (Ch. 6)
Job 42:1–3 (Ch. 14)
Job 42:1–6 (Ch. 17)
Job 42:2 (Ch. 18)
Job 42:6–8 (Ch. 18)
Job 42:7 (Ch. 6, 8, 15)
Job 42:7–8 (Ch. 14, 17)
PSALMS
Ps. 5:9 (Ch. 2)
Ps. 10:7 (Ch. 2)
Ps. 14:1–3 (Ch. 2)
Ps. 23:1 (Ch. 5, 6)
Ps. 36:1 (Ch. 2)
Ps. 51 (Ch. 3, 6, 13)
Ps. 51:6 (Ch. 3)
Ps. 51:10 (Ch. 3, 10, 11)
Ps. 51:16–17 (Ch. 3)
Ps. 77:7–10 (Ch. 15)
Ps. 77:11–20 (Ch. 15)
Ps. 82:6 (Ch. 2, 5)
Ps. 115:8 (Ch. 14)
Ps. 120:1 (Ch. 5)
Ps. 120:1–2 (Ch. 5)
Ps. 128:1–2 (Ch. 9)
Ps. 139:1–12 (Ch. 15)
Ps. 139:19–24 (Ch. 15)
Ps. 140:3 (Ch. 2)
PROVERBS
Prov. 9:10 (Ch. 9)
Prov. 31:6–7 (Ch. 3, 6, 16)
ECCLESIASTES
Eccles. 12:14 (Ch. 9)
ISAIAH
Isa. 1:15 (Ch. 15)
Isa. 2:2–5 (Ch. 19)
Isa. 5:1–7 (Ch. 13)
Isa. 5:4 (Ch. 6, 13)
Isa. 8:19–20 (Ch. 5)
Isa. 10:22 (Ch. 19)
Isa. 11:6–9 (Ch. 1)
Isa. 14 (Ch. 1)
Isa. 14:12 (Ch. 1)
Isa. 14:12–14 (Ch. 1, 4)
Isa. 25:9 (Ch. 19)
Isa. 26:3 (Ch. 20)
Isa. 28:9–13 (Ch. 3)
Isa. 28:21 (Ch. 20)
Isa. 29:13 (Ch. 12)
Isa. 31 (Ch. 19)
Isa. 35:6 (Ch. 6, 7)
Isa. 38:17 (Ch. 13)
Isa. 41:8 (Ch. 4, 14)
Isa. 43:24 (Ch. 13)
Isa. 53:2–4 (Ch. 7)
Isa. 55:8–9 (Ch. 1, 17)
Isa. 58:13–14 (Ch. 10, 12)
Isa. 59:7–8 (Ch. 2)
Isa. 61:1 (Ch. 6)
Isa. 61:1–3 (Ch. 7)
Isa. 65:17 (Ch. 10)
Isa. 66:22–23 (Ch. 11)
Isa. 66:23 (Ch. 10)
JEREMIAH
Jer. 3:16 (Ch. 11)
Jer. 5:4 (Ch. 2)
Jer. 7:22–23 (Ch. 11)
Jer. 9:3 (Ch. 2)
Jer. 9:24 (Ch. 8, 16)
Jer. 26–29 (Ch. 7)
Jer. 31:31–34 (Ch. 12)
Jer. 31:33 (Ch. 19)
Jer. 31:33–34 (Ch. 11)
Jer. 31:34 (Ch. 13, 20)
Jer. 31:35–36 (Ch. 19)
EZEKIEL
Ezek. 1:16 (Ch. 11)
Ezek. 1:26–27 (Ch. 20)
Ezek. 2:1 (Ch. 9)
Ezek. 18:31 (Ch. 19)
Ezek. 20:12 (Ch. 10)
Ezek. 20:20 (Ch. 10)
Ezek. 28 (Ch. 1)
Ezek. 28:14 (Ch. 9)
Ezek. 33:11 (Ch. 13)
Ezek. 36:26 (Ch. 9, 14)
Ezek. 36:26–27 (Ch. 11, 12)
DANIEL
Dan. 3:2 (Ch. 9)
Dan. 3:14–15 (Ch. 9)
Dan. 7 (Ch. 7)
Dan. 7:9–10 (Ch. 20)
Dan. 7:10 (Ch. 8)
Dan. 10:5–19 (Ch. 9)
Dan. 12:1 (Ch. 18, 19)
Dan. 12:3 (Ch. 18)
Dan. 12:4 (Ch. 19)
Dan. 12:10 (Ch. 14)
HOSEA
Hos. 4:1 (Ch. 2)
Hos. 4:6 (Ch. 1)
Hos. 4:12 (Ch. 2)
Hos. 4:13–14 (Ch. 5)
Hos. 4:16–17 (Ch. 2)
Hos. 5:4 (Ch. 2)
Hos. 6:6 (Ch. 3, 6, 11)
Hos. 6:7 (Ch. 3)
Hos. 9:10 (Ch. 2)
Hos. 11:1–9 (Ch. 17)
Hos. 11:7–8 (Ch. 8, 9, 13)
Hos. 11:8 (Ch. 8, 13, 16, 19, 20)
Hos. 14:1–4 (Ch. 13)
Hos. 14:1–9 (Ch. 16)
JOEL
Joel 2:13 (Ch. 15)
AMOS
Amos 3:2 (Ch. 2)
Amos 5:21–22 (Ch. 6)
Amos 8:5 (Ch. 12)
Amos 8:11–12 (Ch. 19)
JONAH
Jon. 3:4 (Ch. 19)
Jon. 3:10 (Ch. 19)
Jon. 4:2–3 (Ch. 19)
Jon. 4:4 (Ch. 19)
Jon. 4:5 (Ch. 19)
Jon. 4:11 (Ch. 19)
MICAH
Mic. 4:12 (Ch. 19)
Mic. 6:3 (Ch. 13)
Mic. 6:8 (Ch. 12)
Mic. 7:19 (Ch. 13)
NAHUM
Nah. 1:9 (Ch. 2)
HABAKKUK
Hab. 1–2 (Ch. 3)
Hab. 1:1–4 (Ch. 19)
Hab. 1:2–4 (Ch. 3)
Hab. 1:5 (Ch. 3, 19)
Hab. 1:13 (Ch. 19)
Hab. 2:1 (Ch. 3, 19)
Hab. 2:1–4 (Ch. 19)
Hab. 2:2–4 (Ch. 19)
Hab. 2:3 (Ch. 19)
Hab. 2:3–4 (Ch. 3)
Hab. 2:4 (Ch. 3, 19)
Hab. 2:7 (Ch. 6)
ZECHARIAH
Zech. 2:8 (Ch. 13)
Zech. 3 (Ch. 11)
Zech. 3:1–2 (Ch. 1)
Zech. 7:12 (Ch. 5)
Zech. 8:4–5 (Ch. 1)
MALACHI
Mal. 2:16 (Ch. 6)
MATTHEW
Matt. 4:8–9 (Ch. 4)
Matt. 4:8–10 (Ch. 18)
Matt. 4:8–11 (Ch. 1)
Matt. 4:24 (Ch. 14)
Matt. 5:3 (Ch. 6, 7)
Matt. 5:5 (Ch. 7)
Matt. 5:17 (Ch. 11, 12)
Matt. 5:17–18 (Ch. 5)
Matt. 5:18 (Ch. 5)
Matt. 5:20 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 5:21–22 (Ch. 9, 12)
Matt. 5:21–24 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 5:38 (Ch. 6, 11)
Matt. 5:39–48 (Ch. 11)
Matt. 5:44 (Ch. 6)
Matt. 5:45 (Ch. 20)
Matt. 5:48 (Ch. 5, 14)
Matt. 6:5–13 (Ch. 15)
Matt. 6:9–13 (Ch. 15)
Matt. 6:13 (Ch. 15)
Matt. 6:26 (Ch. 11)
Matt. 7:21–23 (Ch. 2, 8)
Matt. 7:22–23 (Ch. 17)
Matt. 7:28–29 (Ch. 7)
Matt. 8:16 (Ch. 14)
Matt. 10:29 (Ch. 6)
Matt. 10:30 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 10:34–36 (Ch. 20)
Matt. 11:3 (Ch. 6)
Matt. 11:4–6 (Ch. 6, 7)
Matt. 11:28–30 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 11:30 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 14:21 (Ch. 7)
Matt. 14:22 (Ch. 7)
Matt. 14:23 (Ch. 15)
Matt. 16:21 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 17:3–4 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 17:22 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 18:1–4 (Ch. 18)
Matt. 18:3–4 (Ch. 18)
Matt. 18:21–22 (Ch. 20)
Matt. 19:3–10 (Ch. 11)
Matt. 19:7 (Ch. 6)
Matt. 19:7–8 (Ch. 6)
Matt. 19:10 (Ch. 11)
Matt. 19:11–12 (Ch. 11)
Matt. 19:20 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 20:19 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 22:35–40 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 22:36–40 (Ch. 2, 20)
Matt. 22:37 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 22:37–39 (Ch. 8)
Matt. 23:15 (Ch. 17)
Matt. 23:23 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 23:23–24 (Ch. 17)
Matt. 23:24 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 23:28 (Ch. 12)
Matt. 23:37 (Ch. 9)
Matt. 24:3 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:4–5 (Ch. 7)
Matt. 24:14 (Ch. 16, 19)
Matt. 24:23–24 (Ch. 7)
Matt. 24:24 (Ch. 17)
Matt. 24:24–27 (Ch. 14)
Matt. 24:27 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:29 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:30–31 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:34 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:36 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:44 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 24:48 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 25:1–13 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 25:39–40 (Ch. 6)
Matt. 25:40 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 26:36–46 (Ch. 2)
Matt. 26:39 (Ch. 15)
Matt. 26:41 (Ch. 13)
Matt. 26:47–50 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 26:69–74 (Ch. 13)
Matt. 26:74 (Ch. 13)
Matt. 26:75 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 27:3–4 (Ch. 13)
Matt. 27:3–5 (Ch. 19)
Matt. 27:5 (Ch. 13)
Matt. 27:46 (Ch. 1, 8)
MARK
Mark 2:23 (Ch. 12)
Mark 2:27 (Ch. 10, 11, 12)
Mark 2:27–28 (Ch. 7)
Mark 3:34 (Ch. 2)
Mark 5:22 (Ch. 7)
Mark 5:35–43 (Ch. 7)
Mark 5:43 (Ch. 6)
Mark 6:44 (Ch. 7)
Mark 6:45 (Ch. 7)
Mark 6:55–56 (Ch. 14)
Mark 7:4 (Ch. 12)
Mark 8:31 (Ch. 2)
Mark 9:4–5 (Ch. 2)
Mark 9:12 (Ch. 2)
Mark 9:24 (Ch. 4)
Mark 9:31 (Ch. 2)
Mark 10:34 (Ch. 2)
Mark 12:37 (Ch. 7)
Mark 13:10 (Ch. 19)
Mark 14:27 (Ch. 13)
Mark 14:29 (Ch. 13)
Mark 14:31 (Ch. 13)
Mark 14:32–42 (Ch. 2)
Mark 14:36 (Ch. 15)
Mark 14:72 (Ch. 19)
Mark 15:34 (Ch. 1, 8)
Mark 16:7 (Ch. 13)
LUKE
Luke 1:11–13 (Ch. 9)
Luke 1:26–30 (Ch. 9)
Luke 1:41 (Ch. 5)
Luke 4:32 (Ch. 7)
Luke 4:40 (Ch. 14)
Luke 5:8–10 (Ch. 9)
Luke 6:12 (Ch. 15)
Luke 7:22 (Ch. 7)
Luke 7:36–50 (Ch. 13)
Luke 7:39 (Ch. 13)
Luke 7:40 (Ch. 13)
Luke 7:41–43 (Ch. 13)
Luke 7:50 (Ch. 14)
Luke 8:41–42 (Ch. 7)
Luke 8:48 (Ch. 14)
Luke 8:49–56 (Ch. 7)
Luke 8:50 (Ch. 14)
Luke 8:55 (Ch. 6)
Luke 9:14 (Ch. 7)
Luke 9:22 (Ch. 2)
Luke 9:30–33 (Ch. 2)
Luke 10:18 (Ch. 17)
Luke 11:2–4 (Ch. 15)
Luke 11:37–52 (Ch. 9)
Luke 12:7 (Ch. 2)
Luke 12:45 (Ch. 19)
Luke 15:10 (Ch. 13)
Luke 15:11–32 (Ch. 2, 13)
Luke 15:17–22 (Ch. 20)
Luke 15:20–24 (Ch. 13, 20)
Luke 17:9 (Ch. 6)
Luke 17:12–19 (Ch. 14)
Luke 17:19 (Ch. 14)
Luke 17:25 (Ch. 2)
Luke 18:21 (Ch. 12)
Luke 18:32–33 (Ch. 2)
Luke 18:42 (Ch. 14)
Luke 19:41–44 (Ch. 9)
Luke 22:15 (Ch. 13)
Luke 22:21–22 (Ch. 13)
Luke 22:23–24 (Ch. 13)
Luke 22:41–46 (Ch. 2)
Luke 22:43 (Ch. 8)
Luke 22:61–62 (Ch. 13, 19)
Luke 23:34 (Ch. 3, 7, 13, 17)
Luke 23:38 (Ch. 3)
Luke 23:39–43 (Ch. 12)
Luke 23:42–43 (Ch. 3, 17)
Luke 23:54–56 (Ch. 7)
Luke 24:7 (Ch. 2)
Luke 24:13–35 (Ch. 7)
Luke 24:15–17 (Ch. 4)
Luke 24:27 (Ch. 4, 6)
Luke 24:30–31 (Ch. 4)
Luke 24:36–43 (Ch. 13)
Luke 24:44 (Ch. 5)
JOHN
John 1 (Ch. 6)
John 1:1 (Ch. 10)
John 1:3 (Ch. 10)
John 1:4–5 (Ch. 1)
John 1:9 (Ch. 2, 4)
John 1:11 (Ch. 20)
John 1:17–18 (Ch. 16)
John 1:18 (Ch. 10)
John 2 (Ch. 6)
John 2:1–11 (Ch. 7)
John 2:3 (Ch. 6)
John 2:4 (Ch. 6)
John 2:5 (Ch. 4)
John 2:6 (Ch. 12)
John 2:11 (Ch. 4)
John 3:3 (Ch. 3, 14)
John 3:4 (Ch. 3, 14)
John 3:5 (Ch. 12)
John 3:8 (Ch. 18)
John 3:9 (Ch. 3)
John 3:16 (Ch. 6, 8)
John 3:19 (Ch. 9)
John 3:20–21 (Ch. 11)
John 3:30 (Ch. 6)
John 4:23–24 (Ch. 1)
John 5:1–15 (Ch. 14)
John 5:3–4 (Ch. 5)
John 5:6 (Ch. 13, 14)
John 5:8 (Ch. 13)
John 5:10 (Ch. 12)
John 5:14 (Ch. 13)
John 5:16 (Ch. 12)
John 5:18 (Ch. 12)
John 5:19, 30 (Ch. 1)
John 5:22 (Ch. 9)
John 5:28 (Ch. 4)
John 5:39 (Ch. 4, 6, 8, 12)
John 5:39–40 (Ch. 6, 12)
John 6 (Ch. 14)
John 6:10 (Ch. 7)
John 6:15 (Ch. 7)
John 6:50–63 (Ch. 7)
John 6:67–68 (Ch. 7)
John 7:20 (Ch. 18)
John 7:53 (Ch. 13)
John 8 (Ch. 13)
John 8:1–11 (Ch. 6)
John 8:2 (Ch. 13)
John 8:3–11 (Ch. 13)
John 8:4 (Ch. 13)
John 8:5 (Ch. 13)
John 8:5–6 (Ch. 13)
John 8:6–7 (Ch. 13)
John 8:7 (Ch. 13)
John 8:8–9 (Ch. 13)
John 8:10–11 (Ch. 13)
John 8:11 (Ch. 13)
John 8:15 (Ch. 9)
John 8:28–29 (Ch. 1)
John 8:32 (Ch. 9, 12, 16)
John 8:36 (Ch. 12)
John 8:44 (Ch. 1, 2)
John 8:44–45 (Ch. 7)
John 8:45–49 (Ch. 13)
John 8:45–52 (Ch. 13)
John 8:48 (Ch. 7, 8, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20)
John 10:18 (Ch. 8)
John 10:34 (Ch. 5)
John 10:35 (Ch. 5)
John 11:17 (Ch. 7)
John 11:35 (Ch. 6, 7)
John 11:36 (Ch. 7)
John 11:39 (Ch. 7)
John 11:39–44 (Ch. 7)
John 11:43–44 (Ch. 7)
John 11:53 (Ch. 7)
John 12:1–8 (Ch. 13)
John 12:9–11 (Ch. 7)
John 12:31–32 (Ch. 1, 10)
John 12:32 (Ch. 1, 8)
John 12:47–48 (Ch. 9)
John 13 (Ch. 6)
John 13:4–12 (Ch. 13)
John 13:27–29 (Ch. 13)
John 14–16 (Ch. 4, 6)
John 14:1–3 (Ch. 19, 20)
John 14:6–9 (Ch. 10)
John 14:6–11 (Ch. 1)
John 14:7 (Ch. 9, 15, 18)
John 14:7–9 (Ch. 13)
John 14:8 (Ch. 6, 11, 15)
John 14:9 (Ch. 1, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20)
John 14:13–14 (Ch. 15)
John 14:15 (Ch. 12)
John 14:16–17 (Ch. 4)
John 14:26 (Ch. 4, 15, 18)
John 14:26–27 (Ch. 20)
John 15 (Ch. 20)
John 15:10 (Ch. 10)
John 15:14 (Ch. 12)
John 15:15 (Ch. 1, 9, 11, 15)
John 15:26 (Ch. 1, 4, 15)
John 15:26–27 (Ch. 13, 18)
John 16 (Ch. 20)
John 16:2 (Ch. 8)
John 16:7 (Ch. 4, 13)
John 16:7–13 (Ch. 4)
John 16:8–11 (Ch. 14)
John 16:12 (Ch. 11, 17)
John 16:13 (Ch. 4, 11, 18)
John 16:13–14 (Ch. 1, 13)
John 16:25 (Ch. 6)
John 16:25–27 (Ch. 6, 8, 11, 18)
John 16:26 (Ch. 6, 11, 13, 15)
John 16:26–27 (Ch. 1, 6, 9, 11, 15, 17, 20)
John 16:33 (Ch. 20)
John 17 (Ch. 15)
John 17:1–5 (Ch. 1)
John 17:3 (Ch. 3, 8)
John 17:3–4 (Ch. 20)
John 17:4 (Ch. 10)
John 18:28 (Ch. 17)
John 19:25–27 (Ch. 3, 17)
John 19:30 (Ch. 1, 2, 8, 10, 16, 17)
John 19:31 (Ch. 8, 12, 17)
John 20:17 (Ch. 2, 6, 13)
John 20:26–28 (Ch. 13)
John 20:28 (Ch. 11)
John 21:20–23 (Ch. 19)
John 21:25 (Ch. 2)
ACTS
Acts 1:15–20 (Ch. 19)
Acts 5:1–11 (Ch. 13, 20)
Acts 5:5 (Ch. 6)
Acts 5:10 (Ch. 6)
Acts 7:56 (Ch. 13)
Acts 7:58 – 8:1 (Ch. 18)
Acts 7:60 (Ch. 7)
Acts 8:1–3 (Ch. 7)
Acts 9:1–2 (Ch. 7)
Acts 9:3–4 (Ch. 7)
Acts 9:4–6 (Ch. 7)
Acts 9:10–19 (Ch. 7)
Acts 10:5–16 (Ch. 15)
Acts 10:13–14 (Ch. 15)
Acts 15 (Ch. 12)
Acts 16:25–26 (Ch. 3)
Acts 16:27–29 (Ch. 3)
Acts 16:30 (Ch. 14)
Acts 16:30–31 (Ch. 3)
Acts 17:22 (Ch. 10)
Acts 17:22–31 (Ch. 10)
Acts 17:34 (Ch. 10)
Acts 21:15–28 (Ch. 16)
ROMANS
Rom. 1–8 (Ch. 1)
Rom. 1:1 (Ch. 16)
Rom. 1:4–5 (Ch. 16)
Rom. 1:13 (Ch. 6)
Rom. 1:16–17 (Ch. 1, 3, 8, 16, 19)
Rom. 1:17–18 (Ch. 16)
Rom. 1:18 (Ch. 8)
Rom. 1:18–20 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 1:18–23 (Ch. 2, 18)
Rom. 1:18–28 (Ch. 17)
Rom. 1:19–20 (Ch. 1, 3)
Rom. 1:20–32 (Ch. 16)
Rom. 1:21–23 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 1:24 (Ch. 8)
Rom. 1:24–28 (Ch. 9)
Rom. 1:25 (Ch. 2, 9)
Rom. 1:26 (Ch. 8)
Rom. 1:28 (Ch. 8, 9)
Rom. 1:28–32 (Ch. 2, 13)
Rom. 2:4 (Ch. 2, 13, 19)
Rom. 2:13–16 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 2:15 (Ch. 11)
Rom. 2:20 (Ch. 14)
Rom. 2:26–29 (Ch. 19)
Rom. 3:3–4 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 3:4 (Ch. 7, 8)
Rom. 3:7–8 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 3:8 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 3:10 (Ch. 13)
Rom. 3:10–18 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 3:21–30 (Ch. 1)
Rom. 3:23 (Ch. 13, 14)
Rom. 3:25 (Ch. 6)
Rom. 3:25–26 (Ch. 8, 16, 17)
Rom. 3:28 (Ch. 16)
Rom. 3:31 (Ch. 11, 12)
Rom. 4 (Ch. 6)
Rom. 4:3 (Ch. 14)
Rom. 4:24–25 (Ch. 8)
Rom. 4:25 (Ch. 17)
Rom. 5:1 (Ch. 2, 20)
Rom. 5:3–4 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 6:1–2 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 6:2 (Ch. 2)
Rom. 6:3–4 (Ch. 14)
Rom. 6:3–6 (Ch. 5)
Rom. 6:4 (Ch. 14)
Rom. 6:14 (Ch. 12)
Rom. 6:14–15 (Ch. 16)
Rom. 6:23 (Ch. 2, 6, 8)
Rom. 7 (Ch. 12, 20)
Rom. 7:7–11 (Ch. 12)
Rom. 7:19–23 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 7:22 (Ch. 12)
Rom. 7:23–24 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 8 (Ch. 1, 15, 20)
Rom. 8:1 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 8:2 (Ch. 12)
Rom. 8:3 (Ch. 2, 3, 8, 9, 13, 14)
Rom. 8:15 (Ch. 15, 16)
Rom. 8:18–25 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 8:26 (Ch. 11, 15)
Rom. 8:26–27 (Ch. 4, 11)
Rom. 8:26–39 (Ch. 9)
Rom. 8:28 (Ch. 15)
Rom. 8:31 (Ch. 11, 20)
Rom. 8:33–34 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 8:38–39 (Ch. 20)
Rom. 9 (Ch. 1, 4, 20)
Rom. 9:6–8 (Ch. 19)
Rom. 9:14–26 (Ch. 1)
Rom. 9:20–21 (Ch. 1)
Rom. 9:21 (Ch. 1)
Rom. 10:4 (Ch. 12)
Rom. 10:11 (Ch. 4)
Rom. 10:13–15 (Ch. 4)
Rom. 10:17 (Ch. 3, 4)
Rom. 11 (Ch. 19)
Rom. 11:33 (Ch. 1, 3)
Rom. 12:3 (Ch. 3)
Rom. 12:19 (Ch. 8)
Rom. 13:10 (Ch. 8, 12, 20)
Rom. 14:5 (Ch. 7, 10, 11, 12, 16, 20)
Rom. 14:10 (Ch. 10, 11, 16)
Rom. 14:12 (Ch. 10)
Rom. 14:23 (Ch. 1, 2)
Rom. 15 (Ch. 16)
1 CORINTHIANS
1 Cor. 1:17–18 (Ch. 8, 16)
1 Cor. 2:1–2 (Ch. 10)
1 Cor. 2:6 (Ch. 14)
1 Cor. 3:1 (Ch. 14)
1 Cor. 3:1–3 (Ch. 14)
1 Cor. 4:9 (Ch. 1)
1 Cor. 7:8–9 (Ch. 6)
1 Cor. 7:25–28 (Ch. 18)
1 Cor. 7:36–37 (Ch. 16)
1 Cor. 9:27 (Ch. 5)
1 Cor. 10:4 (Ch. 6)
1 Cor. 10:13 (Ch. 10, 15, 18)
1 Cor. 11:1 (Ch. 14)
1 Cor. 13 (Ch. 16, 18)
1 Cor. 13:4–5 (Ch. 14)
1 Cor. 13:4–6 (Ch. 12)
1 Cor. 13:5 (Ch. 18)
1 Cor. 13:11 (Ch. 18)
1 Cor. 14:20 (Ch. 14)
1 Cor. 14:34–35 (Ch. 6, 16)
2 CORINTHIANS
2 Cor. 3:18 (Ch. 14)
2 Cor. 5:8–9 (Ch. 19)
2 Cor. 5:19 (Ch. 6, 8)
2 Cor. 5:21 (Ch. 8, 9, 13)
2 Cor. 11:13–15 (Ch. 7)
2 Cor. 11:14–15 (Ch. 16)
GALATIANS
Gal. 1:6–7 (Ch. 16)
Gal. 1:8–9 (Ch. 16, 18)
Gal. 2:11–14 (Ch. 16)
Gal. 3 (Ch. 6, 11, 12)
Gal. 3:1 (Ch. 16, 20)
Gal. 3:19 (Ch. 1, 11, 12)
Gal. 3:19–25 (Ch. 12)
Gal. 3:23–25 (Ch. 10)
Gal. 3:24–25 (Ch. 11)
Gal. 3:25 (Ch. 11, 12)
Gal. 4:4 (Ch. 8)
Gal. 4:6 (Ch. 15)
Gal. 4:8–9 (Ch. 16)
Gal. 4:9 (Ch. 16)
Gal. 5:1 (Ch. 16)
Gal. 5:12 (Ch. 16)
Gal. 5:13–14 (Ch. 12)
Gal. 5:13–23 (Ch. 12)
Gal. 5:14 (Ch. 12)
Gal. 5:18 (Ch. 12)
Gal. 5:22 (Ch. 4, 18, 20)
Gal. 5:22–23 (Ch. 12, 18)
Gal. 5:23 (Ch. 18)
EPHESIANS
Eph. 1:9–10 (Ch. 1)
Eph. 1:13 (Ch. 18)
Eph. 1:17 (Ch.18)
Eph. 2:8 (Ch. 3)
Eph. 3:9–10 (Ch. 1, 2)
Eph. 3:16 (Ch. 12)
Eph. 4:11–16 (Ch. 4, 18)
Eph. 4:12 (Ch. 14)
Eph. 4:13 (Ch. 5, 14)
Eph. 4:13–15 (Ch. 18)
Eph. 4:14 (Ch. 7, 17)
Eph. 4:14–15 (Ch. 14, 18)
Eph. 4:30 (Ch. 18)
Eph. 5:9 (Ch. 18)
Eph. 6:11–14 (Ch. 18)
PHILIPPIANS
Phil. 2:6 (Ch. 19)
Phil. 2:9–11 (Ch. 1)
COLOSSIANS
Col. 1:16 (Ch. 10)
Col. 1:19–20 (Ch. 1)
Col. 1:20 (Ch. 8, 20)
Col. 2 (Ch. 10)
Col. 2:14 (Ch. 10, 11)
Col. 2:14–16 (Ch. 12)
Col. 2:16 (Ch. 10)
1 THESSALONIANS
1 Thess. 4:15 (Ch. 6)
1 Thess. 4:15–17 (Ch. 19)
1 Thess. 4:16 (Ch. 4)
1 Thess. 4:16–17 (Ch. 19)
1 Thess. 5:4 (Ch. 19)
1 Thess. 5:17 (Ch. 15)
1 Thess. 5:21 (Ch. 7)
2 THESSALONIANS
2 Thess. 2 (Ch. 18)
2 Thess. 2:1–3 (Ch. 1, 7)
2 Thess. 2:1–10 (Ch. 18)
2 Thess. 2:4 (Ch. 4, 18)
2 Thess. 2:4–12 (Ch. 1)
2 Thess. 2:6–7 (Ch. 17)
2 Thess. 2:8–10 (Ch. 18)
2 Thess. 2:8–12 (Ch. 14)
2 Thess. 2:9 (Ch. 4)
2 Thess. 2:9–10 (Ch. 7)
1 TIMOTHY
1 Tim. 1:8–9 (Ch. 11, 12)
1 Tim. 1:12–16 (Ch. 16)
1 Tim. 2:5 (Ch. 20)
1 Tim. 2:12 (Ch. 6)
1 Tim. 3:16 (Ch. 17)
1 Tim. 4:1–3 (Ch. 18)
1 Tim. 5:13 (Ch. 13)
2 TIMOTHY
2 Tim. 3:14–17 (Ch. 5)
2 Tim. 3:16 (Ch. 5, 6)
HEBREWS
Heb. 1:1 (Ch. 2, 11, 17)
Heb. 1:1–2 (Ch. 4)
Heb. 1:1–3 (Ch. 5, 6)
Heb. 2:15 (Ch. 9)
Heb. 2:17 (Ch. 11)
Heb. 4 (Ch. 10)
Heb. 4:2 (Ch. 20)
Heb. 4:9 (Ch. 10, 11, 20)
Heb. 4:9–11 (Ch. 7)
Heb. 4:13 (Ch. 9)
Heb. 4:15 (Ch. 11)
Heb. 4:16 (Ch. 11)
Heb. 5:6 (Ch. 11)
Heb. 5:12–13 (Ch. 4)
Heb. 5:12–6:1 (Ch. 14)
Heb. 5:13 (Ch. 14)
Heb. 5:13–14 (Ch. 18)
Heb. 5:14 (Ch. 7, 14)
Heb. 6:1 (Ch. 18)
Heb. 7:25 (Ch. 20)
Heb. 8:8–12 (Ch. 12)
Heb. 8:12 (Ch. 13)
Heb. 9:5 (Ch. 8)
Heb. 9:12–14 (Ch. 12)
Heb. 9:22 (Ch. 2, 8)
Heb. 9:26 (Ch. 2)
Heb. 10:3–4 (Ch. 8, 11)
Heb. 10:10–14 (Ch. 8)
Heb. 10:17 (Ch. 13)
Heb. 10:30 (Ch. 20)
Heb. 10:35–39 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 11 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 11:1 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 11:3 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 11:19 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 11:31–32 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 11:37 (Ch. 14)
Heb. 11:39 (Ch. 3)
Heb. 12:9–11 (Ch. 20)
Heb. 12:11 (Ch. 20)
JAMES
James 1:13–15 (Ch. 15)
James 1:14 (Ch. 15)
James 1:25 (Ch. 10)
James 2 (Ch. 3)
James 2:8 (Ch. 10, 12)
James 2:10 (Ch. 20)
James 2:12 (Ch. 10, 12)
James 2:14 (Ch. 3)
James 2:19 (Ch. 1, 3, 4, 7, 16, 18)
James 2:21–22 (Ch. 3)
James 2:21–23 (Ch. 3)
James 2:23 (Ch. 3, 4, 14, 15)
James 4:17 (Ch. 2)
1 PETER
1 Pet. 2:2 (Ch. 14)
1 Pet. 2:24 (Ch. 8, 13)
1 Pet. 3:1 (Ch. 5)
1 Pet. 4:12–14 (Ch. 20)
1 Pet. 5:8 (Ch. 16, 17)
1 Pet. 5:8–9 (Ch. 17)
2 PETER
2 Pet. 1:20–21 (Ch. 4)
2 Pet. 1:21 (Ch. 14)
2 Pet. 3 (Ch. 19)
2 Pet. 3:3–4 (Ch. 19)
2 Pet. 3:3–10 (Ch. 4)
2 Pet. 3:8 (Ch. 19, 20)
2 Pet. 3:9 (Ch. 2, 13, 17, 19)
2 Pet. 3:10 (Ch. 2, 10)
2 Pet. 3:12 (Ch. 17, 19)
2 Pet. 3:15 (Ch. 19)
1 JOHN
1 John 2:1 (Ch. 11)
1 John 2:11 (Ch. 12)
1 John 2:18 (Ch. 19)
1 John 2:18–19 (Ch. 19)
1 John 2:22 (Ch. 19)
1 John 3:4 (Ch. 2, 18)
1 John 3:14 (Ch. 12)
1 John 3:15 (Ch. 12)
1 John 4:1–2 (Ch. 7, 17)
1 John 4:3 (Ch. 19)
1 John 4:6 (Ch. 15)
1 John 4:8 (Ch. 6, 18)
1 John 4:16–18 (Ch. 9, 16)
1 John 4:18 (Ch. 9, 15)
1 John 4:20 (Ch. 12)
1 John 5:7–8 (Ch. 5)
2 JOHN
2 John 1:7 (Ch. 19)
JUDE
Jude 1:7 (Ch. 9, 16)
Jude 1:9 (Ch. 2, 4, 5)
Jude 1:14 (Ch. 5)
REVELATION
Rev. 1 (Ch. 1)
Rev. 1:1 (Ch. 1)
Rev. 1:7 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 1:9 (Ch. 1)
Rev. 1:17 (Ch. 9)
Rev. 3:15–17 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 3:21 (Ch. 2)
Rev. 4:5 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 4:8 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 4:11 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 5:5–6 (Ch. 2)
Rev. 5:6–14 (Ch. 1)
Rev. 5:9–10 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 5:9–12 (Ch. 1)
Rev. 5:12–13 (Ch. 2)
Rev. 6:15–17 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 6:16 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 7:1–3 (Ch. 16, 17, 18, 19)
Rev. 7:14 (Ch. 18, 19)
Rev. 10:6 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 12 (Ch. 1, 2, 4, 16, 17)
Rev. 12:4 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 12:7–8 (Ch. 4)
Rev. 12:7–10 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 12:7–12 (Ch. 1, 3)
Rev. 12:10 (Ch. 11, 20)
Rev. 12:12 (Ch. 4, 7, 16, 17, 18)
Rev. 12:17 (Ch. 10, 16, 17)
Rev. 13 (Ch. 10, 14, 16, 17)
Rev. 13:4 (Ch. 4)
Rev. 13:5–10 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 13:8 (Ch. 7, 17, 18, 19)
Rev. 13:12–18 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 13:13–14 (Ch. 4, 7, 18, 19)
Rev. 13:16–17 (Ch. 16, 17)
Rev. 14 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:6 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:6–7 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:6–12 (Ch. 16, 17, 19)
Rev. 14:7 (Ch. 9, 10, 16)
Rev. 14:8 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:8–11 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:9 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:9–11 (Ch. 6, 8, 11, 16, 17)
Rev. 14:10 (Ch. 8, 9, 16)
Rev. 14:10–11 (Ch. 9, 13)
Rev. 14:11 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 14:12 (Ch. 10, 16, 17)
Rev. 15:1 (Ch. 16)
Rev. 15:3–4 (Ch. 1, 2, 17)
Rev. 16 (Ch. 14)
Rev. 16:13–14 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 19:2 (Ch. 2)
Rev. 20 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 20:4–6 (Ch. 13, 20)
Rev. 20:5 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 20:5–6 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 20:6 (Ch. 13)
Rev. 20:7–10 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 20:8–9 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 20:9 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 20:11–12 (Ch. 13)
Rev. 20:11–15 (Ch. 17)
Rev. 20:14–15 (Ch. 13)
Rev. 21 (Ch. 19)
Rev. 21:1 (Ch. 10)
Rev. 21:4 (Ch. 20)
Rev. 22:11 (Ch. 9)
Rev. 22:16 (Ch. 1)
Rev. 22:21 (Ch. 18)
Permissions to Publish
Scripture quotations marked (RSV) are from the Revised Standard Version of the Bible, copyright
©1946, 1952, and 1971 National Council of the Churches of Christ in the United States of
America. Used by permission. All rights reserved worldwide.
Scripture quotations marked (NIV) are taken from the Holy Bible, New International Version®,
NIV®. Copyright © 1973, 1978, 1984, 2011 by Biblica, Inc.™ Used by permission of Zondervan.
All rights reserved worldwide. www.zondervan.com. The “NIV” and “New International
Version” are trademarks registered in the United States Patent and Trademark Office by Biblica,
Inc.™
Scripture quotations marked (NEB) are taken from the New English Bible, copyright © Cambridge
University Press and Oxford University Press 1961, 1970. All rights reserved.
Phillips: The Four Prophets. Copyright ©J.B. Phillips, 1958, 1960, 1972; 1963, respectively.
From THE NEW TESTAMENT IN MODERN ENGLISH – REVISED EDITION by J. B.
Phillips, Copyright © 1958, 1960, 1972 by J. B. Phillips, Reprinted with the permission of
Scribner, a division of Simon & Shuster, Inc. All rights reserved.
Smith and Goodspeed: The Complete Bible: An American Translation. Copyright © 1923, 1927,
1948 by The University of Chicago. Used by permission of The University of Chicago Press.
Williams: The New Testament. A Private Translation in the Language of the People. Charles B.
Williams. Copyright 1937 by Bruce Humphries, Inc. Copyright Assigned, 1949, to the Moody
Bible Institute of Chicago.
The Bible: A New Translation, by James Moffat. Copyright, 1954.
The Jerusalem Bible © 1966 by Darton Longman & Todd Ltd and Doubleday and Company Ltd.
THE NEW TESTAMENT. Rendered from the Original Greek. With Explanatory Notes. Part 1:
The Four Gospels. Translated By James A Kleist SJ. Part 2: Acts of the Apostles, Epistles &
Apocalypse [Kleist, James A. And Joseph L. Lilly] © 1956, The Bruce Publishing Company.
The New Testament in Modern Speech, Richard Francis Weymouth, Printed by the Pilgrim
Press, 1943, 1944 by special arrangements with James Clarke and Co., Ltd., London and all rights
reserved.
Montgomery New Testament, Helen Barrett Montgomery. © 1924, Judson Press, Valley Forge,
PA.
Norlie’s Simplified New Testament, Olaf M. Norlie. With The Psalms for Today by R.K.
Harrison. Copyright 1961 by Zondervan Publishing House. All rights reserved.
THE MODERN LANGUAGE BIBLE, THE NEW BERKLEY VERSION IN MODERN ENGLISH, Copyright © 1945, 1959, 1969 by Zondervan Publishing House.
The Living Bible: Scripture quotations marked (TLB) are taken from The Living Bible copyright ©
1971. Used by permission of Tyndale House Publishers, Inc., Carol Stream, Illinois 60188. All
rights reserved.
Scripture notations marked (NAB) New American Bible Scripture texts in this work are taken
from the New American Bible, revised edition © 2010, 1991, 1986, 1970 Confraternity of
Christian Doctrine, Washington, D.C. and are used by permission of the copyright owner. All
Rights Reserved. No part of the New American Bible may be reproduced in any form without
permission in writing from the copyright owner.
(KJV) King James Version
(NKJV) Scripture taken from the New King James Version. Copyright © 1982 by Thomas
Nelson, Inc. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
The Twentieth Century New Testament (Westcott & Hort’s Text), The Fleming H. Revell
Company, 1904.
The New Testament of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Metropolitan Fan S. Noli.
Copyright, 1961, by Metropolitan Fan S. Noli.
American Standard Version (ASV), 1901, 1929.
The New Testament in the Language of Today, William F. Beck, © 1963 Concordia Publishing
House.
Douay-Rheims Bible Challoner Revision 1752 (DRC1752)
(ESV) Scripture quotations are from the ESV® Bible (The Holy Bible, English Standard
Version®), copyright © 2001 by Crossway, a publishing ministry of Good News Publishers.
Used by permission. All rights reserved.
Good News Translation® (Today’s English Version, Second Edition) © 1992 American Bible
Society. All rights reserved. Bible text from the Good News Translation (GNT) is not to be
reproduced in copies or otherwise by any means except as permitted in writing by American
Bible Society, 101 North Independence Mall East, Floor 8, Philadelphia, PA 19106-2155
(wwwamericanbible.org).
