- have you ever had to vote in political party election, we are familiary with how the process. THey campaign, they smear each other, we have to sus who we think is telling us the truth, who represents the values that we have, and we cast a vote for them.
God is the leader of the universe but who voted for him? who elected him and who chose him?
Some argue that God is a seperate category of leadership, he is the creator, so powerful so awesome, leadership contests dont apply, he is a supreme ruler above any of our scrutinity and such questioning is not fitting. 
Well we cna all agree we wouldn drag God into court. But the reality of the bible is that somehow he was quesitoned, this is not something we have to speculate on, his leadership was contested. What would happen if the supreme above all ruler was challenged is not just a theoritcal quesiton, it led to open revolt in heaven, one third of angels siding with the challenger, even our first parents deceived to believe God did not have their best at heart.
What would a ruling tyrant do when quesitoned? we have seen it on earth, they silent the opposition by any means necessary, they control the press, they contorl the narative and if they cant they resort complete silencing. They dont tolerate queitoning, or some may see them selves above having to defend themselves. Well for those who want to argue God would respond like tyrant i have sad news for you, the bible is where God lays his case out for our vote.instead of staying above it, he brought himself to court for his own created to judge him. 
The sad reality is that even when you are righteous and telling the truth, it does no good just to deny allegation, it through demonstration of evidence that you convince intelligent reasning and thinking beings. 
But what are the ellegation God is responding to, we dont have a transcript of what led to war in heaven, but we can reasonably speculate it was an attack on his right to rule and his charcter - similar to what done in the garden of eden, in the opening of the bible, God doesnt have your best interest, he is withholdin you from reaching your greater potential, he has lied to you about the consequences of disobedience, even tell them how free he is and how great his life is, the serpent identified as satan. Even job, people see the opening of job as satan attacking Job but its really an attack on Gods rule, he buys the loyalty of job and he is a bad judge of charctaer. 
If God is a tyrant above quesitoning, then why is satan still alive? why has he allowed the side of satan to be heard, why bother addressing the allegations direclty ? IT seems to me God is concerned for his reputaiton that we undersand him correctly, mnany times in the old testement god says im doing something for my names sake not for you - many acitons seem bizzare unless we understand that he needs to say things in defence of his character sometimes, and his friends like moses also understand this, that why moses challenged god and say you cant destroy your people and start again, think about how you will be perceived by the other nations you are trying to win! this is why abraham another fiend of God saidm the God i know wouldnt destroy a city if there even 10 rightous in it. 
It makes sense beucase the things God really want ultimately are freely given love and trust, freely given worhip can only be won by convincing and compelling evidence and a deontration of worhtiness, they cannot be forced. This is why he hasnt destroyed the accusers or the accusers follows, they need to shows to be false. that what Paul says in romans, lets God win his case when takes it court, the let GOd be shows to be true even if everyone man is false. 
Is he worthy of our trust? WEll that depends on the kind of person he is, what kind of Person would you want ruling the universe? someone fair? someone kind? someone who puts others above themselves, someone who is these things in during adversity, someone who will be willing to do the right even when things are tough, someone who is skillful at communicaiton, effective, ofcourse, powerful in the literal sense, but someone who we dont fear, integrity and truth. THe way in which God has responded to the crises in his family has given us a unique opportunity to see him, manage a terrible situation in which his family is split, in which he is quesitoned, in which he is ridiculed and denied. How does he repsond, what does he do to those who reject his love. All this allows us to truly know the kind of person he is. and at the end, do you find him worthy of your trust? do like the person he is? BAre in mind this is not an automatic thing, once you know what he is like then you like him, not quiet, people can stll say no and reject him even after learning what he is like.
indeed people have done rejecting jesus after seeing how gently he was and kind he was, they hated him for it and crufied him, being meek an humble is not everyones cup of tea. When moses claimed he was the meekest man on earth he wasnt bragging because meekness was seen as weakness, he was just owning it.  So cna we know God, when we see him for who he truly is, at least on the things he has been challenged on and on the charcter traits he has presented, do we like him? 
All this more, but where is the evidence? its the entire bible, in each book and each story is weaved in lesson on the kind of person God is, in this book we will be reflective and ask what each action and decision GOd makes reflects the kind of person he is. 


This concept of goigng thorugh the bible in this way is not new, infact I first learned of it form Graham A MAxwell, and there are recorded series where he does this very thing, visit his website read his books. The thing i have done different is, most people say it takes too much time to read all 66 books of the bible, it takes doing it over and over again in order to get a good idea what are the most important lessons about gods character. It takes a while to glean all the principles and learn who is. I decided to do it for you, read through it, provide relevant summaries, extarct the main lessons and points, and do this for all 66 books of the bible. THats a lot of books, you get to get a glimpse of of what I have to understand and learn, hopefully, inspired to go back read the entire thing yourself after, asking the same quesitons. maybe even build on top what we have here. 